--break--
================================================================================
Chapter 1:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
1.1 History
1.2 Impairment, Disability, and Handicap
1.3 The Organ System and Whole Body Approach to Impairment
1.4 Philosophy and Use of the Combined Values Chart
1.5 Incorporating Science with Clinical Judgment
1.6 Causation, Apportionment Analysis, and Aggravation
1.7 Use of the Guides
1.8 Impairment Evaluations in Workers’ Compensation
1.9 Employability Determinations
1.10 Railroad and Maritime Workers
1.11 The Physician’s Role Based on the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
1.12 Summary
1.1
-------INTRODUCTION START (History)-------
History
The Guides was first published in book form in 1971 in response to a public need for a standardized, objective approach to evaluating medical impairments. Sections of the first edition of the Guides were originally published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, beginning in 1958 and continuing until August 1970.1 Since then, the Guides has undergone four revisions, culminating in the current, fifth edition. The purpose of this fifth edition of the Guides is to update the diagnostic criteria and evaluation process used in impairment assessment, incorporating available scientific evidence and prevailing medical opinion. Chapter authors were encouraged to use the latest scientific evidence from their specialty and, where evidence was lacking, develop a consensus view. This chapter was revised from the earlier edition in response to specific requests from user groups concerning the definitions, appropriate use, and scope of application of the Guides.
The fifth edition includes most of the common conditions, excluding unusual cases that require individual consideration. Since this edition encompasses the most current criteria and procedures for impairment assessment, it is strongly recommended that physicians use this latest edition, the fifth edition, when rating impairment.
--break--
1.2 Impairment, Disability, and
Handicap
--break--
1.2a Impairment
The Guides continues to define impairment as
“a loss, loss of use, or derangement of any body part, organ system, or organ function.” 2 This definition of impairment is retained in this edition. A medical impairment can develop from an illness or injury. An impairment is considered permanent when it has reached maximal medical improvement (MMI), meaning it is well stabilized and unlikely to change substantially in the next year with or without medical treatment. The term impairment in the Guides refers to permanent impairment, which is the focus of the Guides.
An impairment can be manifested objectively, for example, by a fracture, and/or subjectively, through fatigue and pain.3 Although the Guides emphasizes objective assessment, subjective symptoms are included within the diagnostic criteria. According to the Guides, determining whether an injury or illness results in a permanent impairment requires a medical assessment performed by a physician. An impairment may lead to functional limitations or the inability to perform activities of daily living.
-- chars 3229 --
Table 1-1, adapted from a report by the AMA Council on Scientific Affairs, lists various definitions of impairment and disability used by four main authorities: the AMA Guides, the World Health Organization, the Social Security Administration, and a state workers’ compensation statute.4 Although a nationally accepted definition for impairment does not exist, the general concept of impairment is similar in the definitions of most organizations. Several terms used in the AMA definition, and their application throughout the Guides, will be discussed in this chapter and Chapter 2.
Loss, loss of use, or derangement implies a change from a normal or “preexisting” state. Normal is a range or zone representing healthy functioning and varies with age, gender, and other factors such as environmental conditions. For example, normal heart rate varies between a child and adult and according to whether the person is at rest or exercising.
Multiple factors need to be considered when assessing whether a specific or overall function is normal. A normal value can be defined from an individual or population perspective.
When evaluating an individual, a physician has two options: consider the individual’s healthy preinjury or preillness state or the condition of the unaffected side as “normal” for the individual if this is known, or compare that individual to a normal value defined by population averages of healthy people. The Guides uses both approaches. Accepted population values for conditions such as extremity range-ofmotion or lung function are listed in the Guides; it is recommended that the physician use those values as detailed in the Guides when applicable. In other circumstances, for instance, where population values are not available, the physician should use clinical judgment regarding normal structure and function and estimate what is normal for the individual based on the physician’s knowledge or estimate of the individual’s preinjury or preillness condition.
Data from healthy populations, when available and widely referenced, are incorporated into chapters of the Guides. In some organ or body systems, such as respiratory, certain measurements of lung function have been standardized for age and gender. In other body systems, such as the musculoskeletal, age and gender differences are not reflected in most of the values. While there may be age and gender differences anticipated for some musculoskeletal values, such as range of motion in the spine and extremities, this edition of the Guides mainly reflects average range of motion from healthy populations of mixed age and gender. The normal values presented in the musculoskeletal section are based on a review of studies measuring range of motion, as cited in the text. Evaluating physicians may use their clinical judgment, however, and comment on any significant age or gender effect for a particular individual. For instance, the “normal” preinjury range of motion for a gymnast with hypermobility may exceed the listed normal values.
-- chars 3027 --
If an individual had previous measurements of function that were below or above average population values, the physician may discuss that prior value and any subsequent loss for the individual, as well as compare it to the population normal. For example, a highly functioning athlete with documented, abovenormal lung function, who has sustained an injury and now has decreased lung function that is nonetheless similar to population averages, has experienced a loss in his or her lung function and has sustained an impairment. Based only on a population comparison, the athlete would be given a 0% impairment rating. However, it would be more appropriate in this instance for the physician to assign an impairment rating based on the degree of change from the athlete’s preinjury to postinjury state.
In evaluating impairment, the Guides considers both anatomic and functional loss. Some chapters place a greater emphasis on either anatomic or functional loss, depending upon common practice in that specialty. Anatomic loss refers to damage to the organ system or body structure, while functional loss refers to a change in function for the organ or body system. An example of an anatomic deviation is development of heart enlargement; functional loss includes a loss in ejection fraction or the ability of the heart to pump adequately. Anatomic loss receives greater emphasis in the musculoskeletal system, as in measurements such as range of motion. Functional considerations receive greater emphasis in the mental and behavioral section.
The impairment criteria outlined in the Guides provide a standardized method for physicians to use to determine medical impairment. The impairment criteria include diagnostic criteria, incorporating anatomic and functional measures. The impairment criteria were developed from scientific evidence as cited and from consensus of chapter authors or of medical specialty societies.
Impairment percentages or ratings developed by medical specialists are consensus-derived estimates that reflect the severity of the medical condition and the degree to which the impairment decreases an individual’s ability to perform common activities of daily living (ADL), excluding work. Impairment ratings were designed to reflect functional limitations and not disability. The whole person impairment percentages listed in the Guides estimate the impact of the impairment on the individual’s overall ability to perform activities of daily living, excluding work, as listed in Table 1-2.
The medical judgment used to determine the original impairment percentages could not account for the diversity or complexity of work but could account for daily activities common to most people. Work is not included in the clinical judgment for impairment percentages for several reasons: (1) work involves many simple and complex activities; (2) work is highly individualized, making generalizations inaccurate; (3) impairment percentages are unchanged for stable conditions, but work and occupations change; and (4) impairments interact with such other factors as the worker’s age, education, and prior work experience to determine the extent of work disability. For example, an individual who receives a 30% whole person impairment due to pericardial heart disease is considered from a clinical standpoint to have a 30% reduction in general functioning as represented by a decrease in the ability to perform activities of daily living. For individuals who work in sedentary jobs, there may be no decline in their work ability although their overall functioning is decreased. Thus, a 30% impairment rating does not correspond to a 30% reduction in work capability.
-- chars 3681 --
Similarly, a manual laborer with this 30% impairment rating due to pericardial disease may be completely unable to do his or her regular job and, thus, may have a 100% work disability.
As a result, impairment ratings are not intended for use as direct determinants of work disability. When a physician is asked to evaluate work-related disability, it is appropriate for a physician knowledgeable about the work activities of the patient to discuss the specific activities the worker can and cannot do, given the permanent impairment.
Most impairment percentages in this fifth edition have been retained from the fourth edition because there are limited scientific data to support specific changes. It is recognized that there are limited data to support some of the previous impairment percentages as well. However, these ratings are currently accepted and should not be changed arbitrarily. In this edition, some percentages have been changed for greater scientific accuracy or to achieve consistency throughout the book.
A 0% whole person (WP) impairment rating is assigned to an individual with an impairment if the impairment has no significant organ or body system functional consequences and does not limit the performance of the common activities of daily living
indicated in Table 1-2. A 90% to 100% WP impairment indicates a very severe organ or body system impairment requiring the individual to be fully dependent on others for self-care, approaching death.
The activities of daily living, as originally developed for the Guides in the first and second editions,1,6 signify common activities currently represented in scales of Activities of Daily Living and Instrumental Activities of Daily Living.7 The Guides refers to common ADLs, as listed in Table 1-2. The ADLs listed in this table correspond to the activities that physicians should consider when establishing a permanent impairment rating. A physician can often assess a person’s ability to perform ADLs based on knowledge of the patient’s medical condition and clinical judgment. When the physician is estimating a permanent impairment rating, Table 1-2 can help to determine how significantly the impairment impacts these activities. Using the impairment criteria within a class and knowing the activities the individual can perform, the physician can estimate where the individual stands within that class.
There are many scales that measure ability to perform ADLs with greater degrees of accuracy. Many of these scales are concerned with more severe levels of disability, relevant to institutionalized patients and the elderly.7 During the 1970s, the ADL concept was extended to consider problems experienced by those living in the community, a field that has come to be termed Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL).7 There is a continued effort to validate these scales; some of the more commonly utilized, validated IADL and ADL scales are listed in Table 1-3.7 Scales vary in their appropriateness for a given individual, based upon the level of impairment, body systems affected, and degree of accuracy required. Some scales are most appropriate for an active, working population; others are more suited to a chronically ill, disabled population. Since there is no agreed-upon scale for a working population and physicians who use the Guides may evaluate different populations of individuals (ie, healthy or chronically ill), a physician may choose the most appropriate of any of the validated scales for a more in-depth assessment of ADL, to obtain further information to supplement clinical judgment, or to gain assistance in determining where an individual stands within an impairment range.
-- chars 3682 --
ADL
Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
--break--
1.2b Disability
The term disability has historically referred to a broad category of individuals with diverse limitations in the ability to meet social or occupational demands. However, it is more accurate to refer to the specific activity or role the “disabled” individual is unable to perform. Several organizations are moving away from the term disability and instead are referring to specific activity limitations to encourage an emphasis on the specific activities the individual can perform and to identify how the environment can be altered
to enable the individual to perform the activities associated with various social or occupational roles. (Table 1-1).4
According to a 1997 Institute of Medicine Report, “disability is a relational outcome, reflecting the individual’s capacity to perform a specific task or activity, contingent on the environmental conditions in which they are to be performed.”16 Disability is context-specific, not inherent in the individual, but a function of the interaction of the individual and the environment.
The World Health Organization (WHO) is revising its 1980 International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities and Handicaps and has released a draft document, The International Classification of Impairments, Activities and Participation (ICIDH-2).17 The term disability has been replaced by a neutral term, activity, and limits in ability are described as activity limitations. The change in terminology arose for several reasons: to choose terminology without an associated stigma, to avoid labeling, and to emphasize the person’s residual ability. Representatives worldwide are reviewing this international classification scale of impairments, function, and activities.
The Guides continues to define disability as an alteration of an individual’s capacity to meet personal, social, or occupational demands or statutory or regulatory requirements because of an impairment.2 An individual can have a disability in performing a specific work activity but not have a disability in any other social role.2 Physicians have the education and training to evaluate a person’s health status and determine the presence or absence of an impairment. If the physician has the expertise and is well acquainted with the individual’s activities and needs, the physician may also express an opinion about the presence or absence of a specific disability. For example, an occupational medicine physician who understands the job requirements in a particular workplace can provide insights on how the impairment could contribute to a workplace disability.
The impairment evaluation, however, is only one aspect of disability determination. A disability determination also includes information about the individual’s skills, education, job history, adaptability, age, and environment requirements and modifications.3 Assessing these factors can provide a more realistic picture of the effects of the impairment on the ability to perform complex work and social activities. If adaptations can be made to the environment, the individual may not be disabled from performing that activity.
-- chars 3190 --
Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
--break--
9
As discussed in this chapter and illustrated in Figure 1-1, medical impairments are not related to disability in a linear fashion. An individual with a medical impairment can have no disability for some occupations, yet be very disabled for others. For example, severe degenerative disk disease may impair the functioning of the spine of both a licensed practical nurse and a bank president in a similar fashion when performing their activities of daily living. However, in terms of occupation, the bank president is less likely to be disabled by this impairment than the licensed practical nurse. An individual who develops rheumatoid arthritis may be disabled from work as a tailor but may be able to work as a child care aide. A pilot who develops a visual impairment, correctable with glasses, may be able to perform all of his daily activities but is no longer able to fly a commercial plane. An individual with repeated hernias and repairs may no longer be able to lift more than
--break--
20 kg (40 lb) but could work in a factory where mechanical lifts are available.
The Guides is not intended to be used for direct estimates of work disability. Impairment percentages derived according to the Guides criteria do not measure work disability. Therefore, it is inappropriate to use the Guides’ criteria or ratings to make direct estimates of work disability.
--break--
1.2c Handicap
Handicap is a term historically used in both a legal and a policy context to describe disability or people living with disabilities. Though the term continues to be used, generally it is being replaced with the preferred term disability.
--break--
1.3 The Organ System and Whole Body Approach to
Impairment
The Guides impairment ratings reflect the severity and limitations of the organ/body system impairment and resulting functional limitations. Most organ/body systems chapters in the Guides provide impairment ratings that represent the extent of whole person impairment. In addition to listing whole person impairments, the musculoskeletal chapters provide regional impairment ratings (eg, upper extremity, lower extremity); regional ratings are then converted into whole person impairment ratings. Within some musculoskeletal regions, a consensus group developed weights to reflect the relative importance of certain regions. For example, different fingers or different areas of the spine are given different weights, representing their unique and relative importance to the region’s overall functioning. These weights, which have gained acceptance in clinical practice, have been retained to enable regulatory authorities to convert from a regional body to whole person impairment when needed.
--break--
1.4 Philosophy and Use of the Combined
Values Chart
The Combined Values Chart (p. 604) was designed to enable the physician to account for the effects of multiple impairments with a summary value. A standard formula was used to ensure that regardless of the number of impairments, the summary value would not exceed 100% of the whole person.
-- chars 3110 --
According to the formula listed in the combined values chart, multiple impairments are combined so that the whole person impairment value is equal to or less than the sum of all the individual impairment values.
A scientific formula has not been established to indicate the best way to combine multiple impairments. Given the diversity of impairments and great variability inherent in combining multiple impairments, it is difficult to establish a formula that accounts for all situations. A combination of some impairments could decrease overall functioning more than suggested by just adding the impairment ratings for the separate impairments (eg, blindness and inability to use both hands). When other multiple impairments are combined, a less than additive approach may be more appropriate. States also use different techniques when combining impairments. Many workers’ compensation statutes contain provisions that combine impairments to produce a summary rating that is more than additive. Other options are to combine (add, subtract, or multiply) multiple impairments based upon the extent to which they affect an individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living. The current edition has retained the same combined values chart, since it has become the standard of practice in many jurisdictions. Other approaches, when published in scientific peer-reviewed literature, will be evaluated for future editions.
In general, impairment ratings within the same region are combined before combining the regional impairment rating with that from another region. For example, when there are multiple impairments involving abnormal motion, neurologic loss, and amputation of an extremity part, these impairments first should be combined for a regional extremity impairment. The regional extremity impairment then is combined with an impairment from another region, such as from the respiratory system. Spinal impairments in multiple regions are combined.
Exceptions, as detailed in the musculoskeletal chapter, include impairments of the joints of the thumb, which are added, as are the ankle and subtalar joints in the lower extremity: both situations include complex motions.
--break--
1.5
Incorporating Science with Clinical
Judgment
The Guides uses objective and scientifically based data when available and references these sources. When objective data have not been identified, estimates of the degree of impairment are used, based on clinical experience and consensus. Subjective concerns, including fatigue, difficulty in concentrating, and pain, when not accompanied by demonstrable clinical signs or other independent, measurable abnormalities, are generally not given separate impairment ratings. Chronic pain is discussed in Chapter 18. Physicians recognize the local and distant pain that commonly accompanies many disorders. Impairment ratings in the Guides already have accounted for commonly associated pain, including that which may be experienced in areas distant to the specific site of pathology. For example, when a cervical spine disorder produces radiating pain down the arm, the arm pain, which is commonly seen,
-- chars 3146 --
has been accounted for in the cervical spine impairment rating.
The Guides does not deny the existence or importance of these subjective complaints to the individual or their functional impact. The Guides recommends that the physician ascertain and document subjective concerns. Because the presence and severity of subjective concerns varies among individuals with the same condition, the Guides has not yet identified an accepted method within the scientific literature to ascertain how these concerns consistently affect organ or body system functioning. The physician is encouraged to discuss these concerns and symptoms in the impairment evaluation.
Research is limited on the reproducibility and validity of the Guides.18-20 Anecdotal reports indicate that adoption of the Guides results in a more standardized impairment assessment process. As relevant research becomes available, subsequent editions of the Guides will incorporate these evidence-based studies to improve the Guides’ reliability and validity.
Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
--break--
11
Given the range, evolution, and discovery of new medical conditions, the Guides cannot provide an impairment rating for all impairments. Also, since some medical syndromes are poorly understood and are manifested only by subjective symptoms, impairment ratings are not provided for those conditions.
The Guides nonetheless provides a framework for evaluating new or complex conditions. Most adult conditions with measurable impairments can be evaluated under the Guides. In situations where impairment ratings are not provided, the Guides suggests that physicians use clinical judgment, comparing measurable impairment resulting from the unlisted condition to measurable impairment resulting from similar conditions with similar impairment of function in performing activities of daily living.
The physician’s judgment, based upon experience, training, skill, thoroughness in clinical evaluation, and ability to apply the Guides criteria as intended, will enable an appropriate and reproducible assessment to be made of clinical impairment. Clinical judgment, combining both the “art” and “science” of medicine, constitutes the essence of medical practice.
--break--
1.6 Causation, Apportionment Analysis, and Aggravation
--break--
1.6a Causation
Physicians may be asked to provide an opinion about the likelihood that a particular factor (injury, illness, or preexisiting condition) caused the permanent impairment. Determining causation is important from a legal perspective, as it is a factor in determining liability.
The term causation has multiple meanings. Dorland’s Illustrated Medical Dictionary lists 12 different types of “cause” including constitutional, exciting, immediate, local, precipitating, predisposing, primary, proximate, remote, secondary, specific, and ultimate.21 For purposes of the Guides, causation means an identifiable factor (eg, accident or exposure to hazards of a disease) that results in a medically identifiable condition.
-- chars 3044 --
Medical or scientifically based causation requires a detailed analysis of whether the factor could have caused the condition, based upon scientific evidence and, specifically, experienced judgment as to whether the alleged factor in the existing environment did cause the permanent impairment.22 Determining medical causation requires a synthesis of medical judgment with scientific analysis.
The legal standard for causation in civil litigation and in workers’ compensation adjudication varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.23 The physician needs to be aware of the different interpretations of causation and state the context in which the physician’s opinion is being offered.
--break--
1.6 b Apportionment Analysis Apportionment analysis in workers’ compensation represents a distribution or allocation of causation among multiple factors that caused or significantly contributed to the injury or disease and resulting impairment. The factor could be a preexisting injury, illness, or impairment. In some instances, the physician may be asked to apportion or distribute a permanent impairment rating between the impact of the current injury and the prior impairment rating. Before determining apportionment, the physician needs to verify that all the following information is true for an individual:
--break--
1. There is documentation of a prior factor.
--break--
2. The current permanent impairment is greater as a result of the prior factor (ie, prior impairment, prior injury, or illness).
--break--
3. There is evidence indicating the prior factor caused or contributed to the impairment, based on a reasonable probability (> 50% likelihood).
The apportionment analysis must consider the nature of the impairment and its possible relationship to each alleged factor, and it must provide an explanation of the medical basis for all conclusions and opinions. Most states have their own customized methods for calculating apportionment. Generally, the most recent permanent impairment rating is calculated, and then the prior impairment rating is calculated and deducted. The remaining impairment rating would be attributed or apportioned to the current injury or condition.
A common verbal formulation in the workers’ compensation context might state, “in cases of permanent disability less than total, if the degree of disability resulting from an industrial injury or occupational disease is increased or prolonged because of a preexisting physical impairment, the employer shall be liable only for the additional disability from the injury or occupational disease.” 5
For example, in apportioning a spine impairment rating in an individual with a history of a spine condition, one should calculate the current spine impairment. Then calculate the impairment from any preexisting spine problem. The preexisting impairment rating is then subtracted from the present impairment rating to account for the effects of the former. This approach requires accurate and comparable data for both impairments.23
-- chars 3013 --
--break--
1.6c Aggravation
Aggravation, for the purposes of the Guides, refers to a factor(s) (eg, physical, chemical, biological, or medical condition) that alters the course or progression of the medical impairment. For example, an individual develops low back pain and sciatica associated with the finding of an L3-L4 herniated disk. Symptoms continue but are intermittent and do not interfere with performing activities of daily living. A few years later, the individual twists his body while lifting a heavy package and develops constant, severe, acute low back pain and sciatica. Imaging studies show no change in the herniated disk compared to earlier studies. The lifting is considered to have aggravated a preexisting condition.
Terms such as causation, apportionment, and aggravation may all have unique legal definitions in the context of the system in which they are used. The physician is advised to compare these definitions with terminology accepted by the appropriate state or system.
--break--
1.7
Use of the Guides
Because of the scope, depth, standardized approach, and foundation in science and medical consensus, the Guides is used worldwide to estimate adult permanent impairment. A survey completed in 1999 indicates that in the United States, 40 of 51 jurisdictions (50 states and the District of Columbia) use the Guides in workers’ compensation cases because of statute or regulations, or by administrative/legal practice.24
The Guides is formally accepted through adoptive language in each jurisdiction’s statutes (laws passed by a state legislature or the US Congress), courtmade law (case law or precedent), or administrative agency regulation (rules promulgated by administrative agencies such as a state workers’ compensation board). It is this statutory, judicial, or regulatory adoptive language that determines which edition of the Guides is mandated in a particular jurisdiction. Some states, such as Oregon and Florida, have developed their own impairment criteria, modeled on the concepts and material in the Guides. The Guides is also extensively used by the federal systems, eg, FECA (Federal Employees’ Compensation Act). The most recent edition of the Guides is recommended as the latest blend of science and medical consensus.
Beyond the United States, the Guides is used in Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and European countries for different applications, including workers’ compensation, personal injury, and disability claim management. There is a growing international trend to adopt a standardized, medically accepted approach to impairment assessment such as in the Guides. As previously stated, the Guides is not to be used for direct financial awards nor as the sole measure of disability. The Guides provides a standard medical assessment for impairment determination and may be used as a component in disability assessment.
Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
--break--
13
--break--
1.8 Impairment Evaluations in Workers’
-- chars 3008 --
Compensation
In the United States, workers’ compensation is a
no-fault system for providing cash benefits, medical care, and rehabilitation services to individuals with work-related injuries and diseases. All 50 states and the District of Columbia have workers’ compensation acts. Most acts share similar features, although no two are exactly alike. An employee normally must experience a “personal injury by accident arising out of and in the course of employment” to be eligible for benefits. All states provide benefits for workers with occupational diseases, but that coverage is restricted in many states. The claimant receives payments to compensate for lost wages due to temporary total, temporary partial, permanent total, and permanent partial disability. Survivors receive death benefits. For each category of benefits, the state prescribes a maximum and minimum weekly benefit. Many states stipulate partial compensation for a partial loss, based upon a proportion of the number of weeks’ compensation allowed for total loss of the body part.25 Determining eligibility of benefits and the extent of disability is specified by statute and case law.
Because schedules usually do not cover all conditions arising from injuries, many laws allow or require that, in unlisted cases of permanent disability, the jurisdiction must determine the percentage by which the “whole man” or “industrial use” of the employee’s body was impaired. The board, commission, or court also must consider the nature of the injury and the employee’s occupation, experience, training, and age and then award proportional compensation. Medical information is essential for the decision process in these cases.
Physicians who perform impairment and/or disability assessments for workers’ compensation purposes need to identify the state workers’ compensation law that applies to the situation, which is usually the state where the incident occurred. The physician needs to determine which edition of the Guides or other state guidelines are required for these assessments. This information can usually be obtained from the state workers’ compensation board or the state medical society. If the Guides is recommended or required, copies may be ordered through the AMA (see copyright page) or other vendors.
Unfortunately, there is no validated formula that assigns accurate weights to determine how a medical condition can be combined with other factors, including education, skill, and the like, to calculate the effect of the medical impairment on future employment. Therefore, each commissioner or hearing official bases a decision on the assessment of the available medical and nonmedical information. The Guides may help resolve such a situation, but it cannot provide complete and definitive answers. Each administrative or legal system that bases disability ratings on permanent impairment defines its own process of converting impairment ratings into a disability rating that reflects the degree to which the impairment limits the capacity to meet personal, social, occupational, and other demands, or to meet statutory requirements. The Guides is a tool for evaluation of permanent impairment.26, 27
-- chars 3191 --
Impairment percentages derived from the Guides criteria should not be used as direct estimates of disability. Impairment percentages estimate the extent of the impairment on whole person functioning and account for basic activities of daily living, not including work. The complexity of work activities requires individual analyses.
Impairment assessment is a necessary first step
for determining disability.
--break--
1.9 Employability
Determinations
Physicians with the appropriate skills, training, and knowledge may address some of the implications of the medical impairment toward work disability and future employment. The physician may be asked whether an impaired individual can return to work in a particular job. The employer can provide a detailed job analysis, with the actual and anticipated essential requirements of the job and a review of the work environment, including potential hazards and the need for personal protective equipment. The physician can then determine whether the individual’s abilities match the job demands. The physician needs to determine that the individual, in performing essential job functions, will not either be endangered or endanger colleagues or the work environment. For example, it would be unsafe for an individual with a new, unstable seizure disorder to operate mechanical equipment. The physician and other responsible persons should keep in mind the potential for impairment aggravation, as well as the possibility of
changing an individual’s job responsibilities. After reviewing all the necessary information, the physician may then make an objective and repro-
ducible assessment of the ability of the individual to safely perform the essential functions of the job.
More complicated are the cases in which the physician is requested to make a broad judgment regarding an individual’s ability to return to any job in his or her field. A decision of this scope usually requires input from medical and nonmedical experts, such as vocational specialists, and the evaluation of both stable and changing factors, such as the person’s education, skills, and motivation, the state of the job market, and local economic considerations.
Physicians who follow the procedures outlined in the Guides, who review the same information from medical and employment records, and who examine the same patient with a stable condition should obtain approximately the same findings.
--break--
1.10 Railroad and
Maritime Workers
State workers’ compensation laws are not the only means by which employees are compensated for injuries or illnesses. In 1908, Congress passed the Federal Employer’ s Liability Act (FELA), which put in place a comprehensive injury compensation system for railroad workers. FELA provides a modified tort system for injured railroad workers, and it supersedes state workers’ compensation laws. The Jones Act, passed in 1920, covers compensation for maritime workers injured due to a ship owner’s negligence. That law provides for the same rights and remedies that were extended through FELA.
-- chars 3054 --
A lawsuit filed under FELA must be based on the railroad’s negligence in providing the employee with a safe workplace. An injured employee must prove that the railroad should have foreseen that a condition or activity might cause the injury or disease. The test determines whether the employer’s negligence played any part in producing the injury. Recoverable amounts include those for necessary medical expenses, pain and suffering, loss of past earnings, and future losses due to diminished earning capacity. An important condition for recovery is that a physician must diagnose the effects of the injury.
Under FELA, all cases must go before a jury or judge, and there are no limits to the amount awarded. In contrast, the awards under state workers’ compensation systems are fixed and limited. Under FELA, the jury decides on the degree of the injured person’s disability. The physician is obligated to obtain a reliable history, confirm past employment by obtaining records, and collect all available medical information.
--break--
1.11 The Physician’s Role Based on the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA)
Physicians, particularly occupational physicians, are frequently asked questions pertaining to work disability and capacity, in light of increasing attention to compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). The ADA is a civil rights law that President Bush signed in 1990.28 It was intended “to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate to end discrimination against individuals with disabilities and bring those individuals into the economic and social mainstream of American life.”18 Under the ADA, individuals with disabilities are protected against discrimination in such diverse areas as employment, government service entitlement, and access to public accommodations (eg, health care services, lodging).
The ADA defines disability as a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of an individual; a record of impairment; or being regarded as having an impairment (see Table 1-1). A person needs to meet only one of the three criteria in the definition to gain the ADA’s protection against discrimination. The physician’s input often is essential for determining the first two criteria and valuable for determining the third.
Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
--break--
15
To be deemed “disabled” for purposes of ADA protection, an individual generally must have a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities. A “physical or mental impairment” could be any mental, psychological, or physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss that affects one or more of the following body systems: neurologic, special sense organs, musculoskeletal, respiratory (including speech organs), reproductive, cardiovascular, hematologic and lymphatic, digestive, genitourinary, skin, and endocrine.29
Conditions that are temporary or not considered to be severe (eg, normal pregnancy) are not considered impairments under the ADA. Other nonimpairments include features and conditions such as hair or eye color, left-handedness, old age, sexual orientation, exhibitionism, pedophilia, voyeurism, sexual addiction, kleptomania, pyromania, compulsive gambling, gender identity disorders not resulting from physical impairment, smoking, and current illegal drug use or resulting psychoactive disorders.
-- chars 3475 --
On June 23, 1999, in answer to a case seeking refinement of the definition of “who is disabled” under the ADA, the Supreme Court stated that individuals who function normally with aids such as glasses or medication could not generally be considered disabled, despite their physical impairments.30
To have the protection of the ADA, a physical or mental impairment must substantially limit the ability to perform a “major life activity.” Major life activities include “basic activities that the average person in the general population can perform with little or no difficulty,” including caring for oneself, manual tasks, hearing, walking, learning, speaking, breathing, working, and reproduction. Major life activities do not have to occur frequently or be part of daily life.31 Note that the major life activities listed here include work, unlike the Guides’ impairment criteria.
The person must be presently, or perceived to be (not potentially or hypothetically), substantially limited in order to demonstrate a disability. It is difficult to determine if an impairment “substantially limits” a major life activity. An impairment’s nature, extent, duration, impact, and effect on the individual are all considerations in assessing the “substantiality” of the limitations.32
For some major life activities, such as work, the physician may provide an opinion on the medical impairment’s limitations. However, as indicated by the recent Supreme Court ruling, how much a limitation of a major life activity results in a determination of disability depends on the interaction between the remaining functional abilities and the possible types of accommodation being sought.33
The third criterion that may establish protection under the ADA is an erroneous perception that the individual is substantially limited in a major life activity or is being discriminated against on the basis of a real or perceived characteristic that does not substantially limit a major life activity.
It is the physician’s responsibility to determine if the impairment results in functional limitations. The physician is responsible for informing the employer about an individual’s abilities and limitations. It is the employer’s responsibility to identify and determine if reasonable accommodations are possible to enable the individual’s performance of essential job activities.
--break--
1.12  Summary
The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the philosophical assumptions and appropriate use of the Guides. The physician needs to comply with prescribed local, state, and federal practices for impairment evaluations. Generally, the physician evaluates all available information and provides as comprehensive a medical picture of the patient as possible, addressing the components listed in the Report of Medical Evaluation form discussed in Chapter 2.
A complete impairment evaluation provides valuable information beyond an impairment percentage, and it includes a discussion about the person’s abilities and limitations, including the ability to perform common activities as listed in Table 1-2. Combining the medical and nonmedical information, and including detailed information about essential work activities if requested, is a basis for improved understanding of the degree to which the impairment may affect the individual’s work ability.
-- chars 3328 --
================================================================================
Chapter 2
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Practical Application of the Guides
2.1 Defining Impairment Evaluations
2.2 Who Performs Impairment Evaluations?
2.3 Examiners’ Roles and Responsibilities
2.4 When Are Impairment Ratings Performed?
2.5 Rules for Evaluation
2.6 Preparing Reports
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter describes how to use the Guides for consistent and reliable acquisition, analysis, communication, and utilization of medical information through a single set of standards. Two physicians, following the methods of the Guides to evaluate the same patient, should report similar results and reach similar conclusions. Moreover, if the clinical findings are fully described, any knowledgeable observer may check the findings with the Guides criteria. This chapter provides information about the practical application of the Guides and is to be used in conjunction with Chapter 1, which provides the conceptual framework upon which the instructions in this chapter are based.
--break--
2.1 Defining
Impairment Evaluations
An impairment evaluation is a medical evaluation performed by a physician, using a standard method as outlined in the Guides to determine permanent impairment associated with a medical condition. An impairment evaluation may include a numerical impairment percentage or rating, as defined in the Guides. An impairment evaluation is not the same as an independent medical evaluation (IME), which is performed by an independent medical examiner who evaluates but does not provide care for the individual. Impairment evaluations may be less comprehensive than IMEs and may be performed by a treating physician or a nontreating physician, depending upon the state’s requirements and the preferences of the individual, physician, and requesting party. Examples of an impairment evaluation and components of a comprehensive IME will be discussed later in this chapter.

--break--
2.2 Who Performs Impairment Evaluations?
Impairment evaluations are performed by a licensed physician. The physician may use information from other sources, such as hearing results obtained from audiometry by a certified technician. However, the physician is responsible for performing a medical evaluation that addresses medical impairment in the body or organ system and related systems. A state may restrict the type of practitioner allowed to perform an impairment evaluation, and some require additional state certification and other criteria, such as a minimum number of hours of practice, before the physician is approved as an impairment evaluator. The physician is encouraged to check with the local workers’ compensation agency, industrial accident board, or industrial commission concerning their prerequisites.
--break--
2.3
Examiners’ Roles and Responsibilities
The physician’s role in performing an impairment evaluation is to provide an independent, unbiased assessment of the individual’s medical condition, including its effect on function, and identify abilities and limitations to performing activities of daily living as listed in Table 1-2. Performing an impairment evaluation requires considerable medical expertise and judgment. Full and complete reporting provides the best opportunity for physicians to explain health status and consequences to patients, other medical professionals, and other interested parties such as claims examiners and attorneys. Thorough documentation of medical findings and their impact will also ensure that reporting is fair and consistent and that individuals have the information needed to pursue any benefits to which they are entitled.
-- chars 3746 --

The skills required for impairment evaluation are usually not taught during basic medical training, although some specialties such as occupational medicine, physical medicine and rehabilitation, and orthopedics have emphasized elements of the evaluation such as occupational, functional, or anatomical assessment.

In some cases, physicians may be asked to assess the medical impairment’s impact on the individual’s ability to work. In the latter case, physicians need to understand the essential functions of the occupation and specific job, as well as how the medical condition interacts with the occupational demands. In many cases, the physician may need to obtain additional expertise to define functional abilities and limitations, as well as vocational demands.

As an impairment evaluator, the physician has the responsibility to understand the regulations that pertain to medical practice in his or her specific area, as in workers’ compensation or personal injury evaluations. It is also the responsibility of the physician to provide the necessary medical assessment to the party requesting the evaluation, with the examinee’s consent. The physician needs to ensure that the examinee understands that the evaluation’s purpose is medical assessment, not medical treatment.
However, if new diagnoses are discovered, the physician has a medical obligation to inform the requesting party and individual about the condition and recommend further medical assessment.

--break--
2.4 When Are Impairment Ratings Performed?
An impairment should not be considered permanent until the clinical findings indicate that the medical condition is static and well stabilized, often termed the date of maximal medical improvement (MMI). It is understood that an individual’s condition is dynamic. Maximal medical improvement refers to a date from which further recovery or deterioration is not anticipated, although over time there may be some expected change. Once an impairment has reached MMI, a permanent impairment rating may be performed. The Guides attempts to take into account all relevant considerations in rating the severity and extent of permanent impairment and its effect on the individual’s activities of daily living.

Impairments often involve more than one body system or organ system; the same condition may be discussed in more than one chapter. Generally, the organ system where the problems originate or where the dysfunction is greatest is the chapter to be used for evaluating the impairment. Thus, consult the vision chapter for visual problems due to optic nerve dysfunction. Refer to the extremity chapters for neurological and musculoskeletal extremity impairment from an injury. However, if the impairment is due to a stroke, the neurology chapter is most appropriate.
Whenever the same impairment is discussed in different chapters, the Guides tries to use consistent impairment ratings across the different organ systems.

--break--
2.5  Rules for Evaluation

--break--
2.5a Confidentiality
-- chars 3017 --
Prior to performing an impairment evaluation, the physician obtains the individual’s consent to share the medical information with other parties that will be reviewing the evaluation. If the evaluating physician is also that person’s treating physician, the physician needs to indicate to the individual which information from his or her medical record will
be shared.

--break--
2.5b Combining Impairment Ratings
To determine whole person impairment, the physician should begin with an estimate of the individual’s most significant (primary) impairment and evaluate other impairments in relation to it. It may be necessary for the physician to refer to the criteria and estimates in several chapters if the impairing condition involves several organ systems. Related but separate conditions are rated separately and impairment ratings are combined unless criteria for the second impairment are included in the primary impairment. For example, an individual with an injury causing neurologic and muscular impairment to his upper extremity would be evaluated under the upper extremity criteria in Chapter 16. Any skin impairment due to significant scarring would be rated separately in the skin chapter and combined with the impairment from the upper extremity chapter. Loss of nerve function would be rated within either the musculoskeletal chapters or neurology chapter.

In the case of two significant yet unrelated conditions, each impairment rating is calculated separately, converted or expressed as a whole person impairment, then combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604). The general philosophy of the Combined Values Chart is discussed in Chapter 1.
--break--
2.5c Consistency
Consistency tests are designed to ensure reproducibility and greater accuracy. These measurements, such as one that checks the individual’s lumbosacral spine range of motion (Section 15.9) are good but imperfect indicators of people’s efforts. The physician must use the entire range of clinical skill and judgment when assessing whether or not the measurements or tests results are plausible and consistent with the impairment being evaluated. If, in spite of an observation or test result, the medical evidence appears insufficient to verify that an impairment of a certain magnitude exists, the physician may modify the impairment rating accordingly and then describe and explain the reason for the modification in writing.

--break--
2.5d Interpolating, Measuring, and Rounding Off
In deciding where to place an individual’s impairment rating within a range, the physician needs to consider all the criteria applicable to the condition, which includes performing activities of daily living, and estimate the degree to which the medical impairment interferes with these activities. In some cases, the physician may need additional information to determine where to place an individual in the range.

As with any biological measurements, some variability and normal fluctuations are inherent in permanent impairment ratings. Two measurements made by the same examiner using the Guides that involve an individual or an individual’s functions would be consistent if they fall within 10% of each other.
-- chars 3196 --
Measurements should also be consistent between two trained observers or by one observer on two separate occasions, assuming the individual’s condition is stable. Repeating measurements may decrease error and result in a measurement that is closer to average function. The final calculated whole person impairment rating, whether it is based on the evaluation of one organ system or several organ systems, should be rounded to the nearest whole number.
--break--
2.5e Pain
The impairment ratings in the body organ system chapters make allowance for any accompanying pain. Chronic pain, also called chronic pain syndrome, is discussed in the chapter on pain (Chapter 18).
--break--
2.5f Using Assistive Devices in Evaluations If an individual’s prosthesis or assistive device can be removed or its use eliminated relatively easily, the physician should usually test and evaluate the organ system without the device. For example, ask the patient to remove a hearing aid before testing auditory acuity. The examiner may choose also to test the system with the assistive device in place and then report both sets of results. The physician may also choose to report alterations in the individual’s organ function with and without use of the device and challenges that are posed by using the device, if any.

If the assistive device is not easily removable, as with an implanted lens, evaluate the organ system’s functioning with the device in place. Test the visual system with the patient’s glasses or contact lenses in place if they are used.

--break--
2.5g Adjustments for Effects of Treatment or Lack of Treatment
In certain instances, the treatment of an illness may result in apparently total remission of the person’s signs and symptoms. Examples include the treatment of hypothyroidism with levothyroxine and the treatment of type 1 diabetes mellitus with insulin. Yet it is debatable whether, with treatment, the patient has actually regained the previous status of normal good health. In these instances, the physician may choose to increase the impairment estimate by a small percentage (eg, 1% to 3%).

In some instances, as with organ transplant recipients who are treated with immunity-suppressing pharmaceuticals or persons treated with anticoagulants, the pharmaceuticals themselves may lead to impairments. In such an instance, the physician should use the appropriate parts of the Guides to evaluate impairment related to pharmaceutical effects. If information in the Guides is lacking, the physician may combine an estimated impairment percent based on the severity of the effect, with the primary organ system impairment, by means of the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

A patient may decline surgical, pharmacologic, or therapeutic treatment of an impairment. If a patient declines therapy for a permanent impairment, that decision neither decreases nor increases the estimated percentage of the individual’s impairment. However, the physician may wish to make a written comment in the medical evaluation report about the suitability of the therapeutic approach and describe the basis of the individual’s refusal. The physician may also need to address whether the impairment is at maximal medical improvement without treatment and the degree of anticipated improvement that could be expected with treatment.
-- chars 3325 --

--break--
2.5h Changes in Impairment from Prior Ratings
Although a previous evaluator may have considered a medical impairment to be permanent, unanticipated changes may occur: the condition may have become worse as a result of aggravation or clinical progression, or it may have improved. The physician should assess the current state of the impairment according to the criteria in the Guides. If an individual received an impairment rating from an earlier edition and needs to be reevaluated because of a change in the medical condition, the individual is evaluated according to the latest information pertaining to the condition in the current edition of the Guides.

Valid assessment of a change in the impairment estimate would depend on the reliability of the previous estimate and the evidence upon which it was based. If a prior impairment evaluation was not performed, but sufficient historical information is available to currently estimate the prior impairment, the assessment would be performed based on the most recent Guides criteria. However, if the information is insufficient to accurately document the change, then the physician needs to explain that decision and should not estimate a change.

If apportionment is needed, the analysis must consider the nature of the impairment and its relationship to each alleged causative factor, providing an explanation of the medical basis for all conclusions and opinions. (Apportionment and causation are considered more fully in Chapter 1 and are briefly defined in the Glossary.) For example, in apportioning a spine impairment, first the current spine impairment rating is calculated, and then an impairment rating from any preexisting spine problem is calculated. The value for the preexisting impairment rating can be subtracted from the present impairment rating to account for the effects of the intervening injury or disease. Using this approach to apportionment requires accurate information and data to determine both impairment ratings. If different editions of the Guides are used, the physician needs to assess their similarity. If the basis of the ratings is similar, a subtraction is appropriate. If they differ markedly, the physician needs to evaluate the circumstances and determine if conversion to the earlier or latest edition of the Guides for both ratings is possible. The determination should follow any state guidelines and should consider whichever edition best describes the individual’s impairment.

--break--
2.6 Preparing Reports
A clear, accurate, and complete report is essential to support a rating of permanent impairment. The following elements in bold type should be included in all impairment evaluation reports. Other elements listed in italics are commonly found within an IME or may be requested for inclusion in an impairment evaluation.
--break--
2.6a Clinical Evaluation
--break--
2.6a.1 Include a narrative history of the medical condition(s) with the onset and course of the condition, symptoms, findings on previous examination(s), treatments, and responses to treatment, including adverse effects. Include information that may be relevant to onset, such as an occupational exposure or injury. Historical information should refer to any relevant investigations. Include a detailed list of
-- chars 3296 --
prior evaluations in the clinical data section.

--break--
2.6a.2 Include a work history with a detailed, chronological description of work activities, specific type and duration of work performed, materials used in the workplace, any temporal associations with the medical condition and work, frequency, intensity, and duration of exposure and activity, and any protective measures.

--break--
2.6a.3 Assess current clinical status, including current symptoms, review of symptoms, physical examination, and a list of contemplated treatment, rehabilitation, and any anticipated reevaluation.
--break--
2.6a.4 List diagnostic study results and outstanding pertinent diagnostic studies. These may include laboratory tests, electrocardiograms, exercise stress studies, radiographic and other imaging studies, rehabilitation evaluations, mental status examinations, and other tests or diagnostic procedures.

--break--
2.6a.5 Discuss the medical basis for determining whether the person is at MMI. If not, estimate and discuss the expected date of full or partial recovery.

--break--
2.6 a.6 Discuss diagnoses, impairments.

--break--
2.6a.7 Discuss causation and apportionment, if requested, according to recommendations outlined in Chapters 1 and 2.
--break--
2.6a.8 Discuss impairment rating criteria, prognosis, residual function, and limitations. Include a discussion of the anticipated clinical course and whether further medical treatment is anticipated. Describe the residual function and the impact of the medical impairment(s) on the ability to perform activities of daily living and, if requested, complex activities such as work. List the types of affected activities (see Table 1-2). Identify any medical consequences for performing activities of daily living.

If requested, the physician may need to analyze different job tasks to determine if an individual has the residual function to perform that complex activity.
The physician should also identify any medical consequence of performing a complex activity such as work.

--break--
2.6a.9 Explain any conclusion about the need for restrictions or accommodations for standard activities of daily living or complex activities such as work.

--break--
2.6b Calculate the Impairment Rating Compare the medical findings with the impairment criteria listed within the Guides and calculate the appropriate impairment rating. Discuss how specific findings relate to and compare with the criteria described in the applicable Guides chapter. Refer to and explain the absence of any pertinent data and how the physician determined the impairment rating with limited data.

--break--
2.6c. Discuss How the Impairment Rating Was Calculated
--break--
2.6c.1 Include an explanation of each impairment value with reference to the applicable criteria of the Guides. Combine multiple impairments for a whole person impairment.
--break--
2.6c.2 Include a summary list of impairments and impairment ratings by percentage, including calculation of the whole person impairment.
-- chars 3021 --

On the following two pages is a standard form that the evaluator may use to ensure that all essential elements are included in the impairment evaluation report. The form may be reproduced without permission from the American Medical Association. Most chapters include a summary form that identifies the salient, specific features to consider for each category of organ system impairment.

Calculated total whole person impairment:
%. Discussion of rationale of impairment rating and any possible inconsistencies in the examination:

================================================================================
Chapter 3:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Cardiovascular System: Heart and Aorta
3.1 Principles of Assessment
3.2 Valvular Heart Disease
3.3 Coronary Heart Disease
3.4 Congenital Heart Disease
3.5 Cardiomyopathies
3.6 Pericardial Heart Disease
3.7 Arrhythmias
3.8 Cardiovascular Impairment Evaluation Summary
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairments of the cardiovascular system and their effects on an individual’s ability to perform the activities of daily living. The cardiovascular system consists of the heart, the aorta, the systemic arteries, and the pulmonary arteries. Impairment of the heart is the focus of this chapter; impairment of diseases of the aorta, the systemic arteries, and pulmonary arteries (including coronary and peripheral circulation) are included in Chapter 4.

The following sections have been revised from the fourth edition: (1) information about valvular heart disease reflecting newly published guidelines from the American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology; (2) information about coronary artery disease reflecting the important prognostic impact of left ventricular function on impairment in individuals with coronary artery disease, and the inclusion of silent ischemia and coronary artery spasm with regard to impairment; and (3) information about cardiomyopathy, including the impact of HIV-related conditions that affect cardiac function.
--break--
3.1 Principles of Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

--break--
3.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs Some impairment classes refer to limitations in the ability to perform daily activities because of symptoms. When this information is subjective and possibly misinterpreted, it should not serve as the sole criterion upon which decisions about impairment are made. Rather, the examiner should obtain objective data about the extent of the limitation and integrate the findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent impairment. See the functional classifications of cardiac disease in Table 3-1.
-- chars 3087 --

Exercise Testing
When feasible, the physician should attempt to quantify limitations due to symptoms by observing the individual during exercise.2 A motor-driven treadmill with varying grades and speeds is the most widely used device for standardized exercise protocols. The protocols vary slightly, but they all attempt to relate the exercise to excess energy expended and to functional class. The excess energy expended is usually expressed in terms of the “MET,” which represents the multiples of resting metabolic energy used for any given activity. One MET is considered to be
--break--
3.5 mL (kg/min). The 70-kg man who burns 1.2 kcal/min while sitting at rest uses approximately 3 METS when walking 4 km/h.

Table 3-2 displays the relationship of excess energy expenditures in METS to functional class according to the protocols of several investigators. With all protocols, the exercise periods last for 2 or 3 minutes; the time periods are represented in the table by boxes with numbers giving the estimated METS involved.
A major problem with the use of any exercise-testing technique to attempt to quantify an individual’s functional capacity is the marked variability in people’s efforts and abilities. Therefore, while measuring the maximum oxygen consumption response, the health care professional should estimate and note the individual’s cooperation and effort during the test; eg, some will continue longer than they should, while others will stop after minimal effort because they feel fatigued.

Functional Capacity
The functional capacity of an individual depends on age, gender, and level of training. The functional class determined by means of Tables 3-2 and 3-3 may not be applicable to people at the ends of the age spectrum, such as a 20-year-old athlete or an inactive 70-year-old woman. Therefore, it may be useful to calculate a “percentage functional aerobic capacity” that is achieved on an exercise test.
Standard charts are available for the various exercise protocols that determine the percentage functional aerobic capacity based on total exercise duration, age, gender, and level of training.4

Left Ventricle Function
Knowledge of the status of the left ventricle is important to assess in the examination and evaluation of an individual with cardiac disease. Two phases of left ventricular (LV) function contribute to the person’s symptoms and condition: systolic function, which is the ability of the heart to pump out blood during contraction; and diastolic function, the process by which the heart fills with blood during relaxation of the myocardium and a passive filling phase.5

Ejection Fraction
A clinically used measure of systolic function is the “ejection fraction” (EF), the percentage of blood the heart is able to eject during one beat. Echocardiography, radionuclide angiography, and left ventriculography are commonly used to measure the EF. A normal EF is greater than to 0.50; EFs of 0.40 to
--break--
0.50 indicate mild systolic dysfunction; 0.30 to 0.40, moderate systolic dysfunction; and < 0.30, severe systolic dysfunction.
-- chars 3088 --

Diastolic Dysfunction
Diastolic dysfunction may contribute to the signs and symptoms of heart failure (HF), but quantifying the degree of dysfunction is problematic. Diastolic dysfunction is usually diagnosed clinically by elevated filling pressures that result in HF in the absence of systolic dysfunction or valvular abnormalities.
Echocardiography with cardiac Doppler is emerging as an accepted tool for the assessment of diastolic function.3, 5-7

--break--
3.1b Determination of Impairment Impairment classes, as listed in Tables 3-5 through 3-11, are disease-specific and based on the NYHA classification system as listed in Table 3-1. The impairment classes reflect anatomic, physiologic,
and functional abnormalities. For example, the information in Table 3-1 category I of the NYHA system is represented in the corresponding class 1 on Table 3-5. The classes listed in Tables 3-5 through 3-11 apply the NYHA functional classification to specific disease conditions. The percentages of impairment reflect the severity of the condition and the extent to which the condition limits the abilities to do activities of daily living.

In the illustrative examples of impairment in this chapter, any historic, physical examination, or laboratory information or data not described should be considered to be within normal limits.

In summary, an evaluation of the cardiovascular system that falls within normal range reflects an individual who performs all activities of daily living without cardiovascular symptoms, has some reserve capacity that allows comfortable exercise without the development of major cardiovascular symptoms, has an LV ejection fraction that falls within normal limits, and completes at least 80% of ageand gender-predicted functional aerobic capacity during exercise stress testing.

--break--
3.2 Valvular Heart Disease
Congenital, rheumatic, infectious, or traumatic factors or a combination of those factors may cause valvular heart disease. Valvular disease may result in
(1) pressure hypertrophy of the left or right ventricle (RV), causing elevated filling pressures, myocardial ischemia, and eventual LV dysfunction with signs and symptoms of congestive heart failure (CHF);
(2) volume hypertrophy of the LV or RV, causing ventricular dilatation and eventual irreversible myocardial dysfunction with signs and symptoms of CHF; (3) inflow obstruction to the ventricles causing congestion of organs, even in the absence of ventricular dysfunction; or (4) decreased cardiac output.5

Valvular heart disease can be detected and its severity assessed by means of a thorough history and physical examination and should be confirmed by either Doppler echocardiography or cardiac catheterization.8 A valve gradient measures the pressure drop across a stenotic valve and is proportional to the severity of obstruction. Since the valve gradient is influenced by the cardiac output, the valve gradient calculates a valve area that takes into consideration both the pressure gradient and the cardiac output.
-- chars 3031 --
There may be technical limitations to these derived variables. Their correlation with the severity of the stenosis is shown in Table 3-4.

The severity of a regurgitant valve lesion is more difficult to assess than that of a stenotic lesion. Physical examination and Doppler echocardiography may provide a qualitative assessment. Although Doppler echocardiography may help the physician determine a mild or severe regurgitant valve lesion, this technique’s inherent limitations preclude an accurate assessment of intermediate grades of severity.
Cardiac catheterization may be required for a semiquantitative estimate of the valve lesion’s severity; it can provide a view of the contrast medium’s intensity as it crosses the regurgitating valve into the receiving heart chamber. To assess the severity of aortic valve regurgitation, obtain the estimate with aortic root angiography; to assess the severity of mitral valve regurgitation, obtain the estimate with left ventriculography.

Catheter-based interventional procedures, operative repair, or prosthetic valve replacement can reduce the severity of, but not fully repair, valvular heart disease. After any of these procedures, allow sufficient time to elapse from the date of surgery for
maximum recovery and reconditioning of the heart, lungs, and other organs before estimating permanent impairment.

In addition, because medication may affect the severity of valvular heart disease, especially limitations due to symptoms, allow sufficient time for medication to be introduced and adjusted and to take effect before estimating permanent impairment.

--break--
3.2 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Valvular Heart Disease The impairment criteria for valvular heart disease are given in Table 3-5.

Chest roentgenogram: normal.
Diagnosis: Asymptomatic mild aortic stenosis secondary to a bicuspid aortic valve with electrocardiographic evidence of LV hypertrophy.
Impairment Rating: 1% to 9% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Antibiotic prophylaxis before dental or surgical procedure to minimize risk of bacterial endocarditis. Periodic cardiac follow-up for progression of aortic stenosis. Aortic valve surgery necessary later in life.

Comment: Impairment greater if (1) a diastolic decrescendo murmur; (2) the systolic gradient across the prosthesis > Doppler-derived normal values for the type of prosthesis; or (3) mild recurrent dyspnea. Cardiac catheterization not necessary for estimate.

impairment due to hypertension per Table 4-2.
roentgenogram: slight prominence heart apex; prosthesis properly positioned: no evidence of pulmonary congestion. Echocardiogram: normal size ventricles; thickening of LV wall; prosthesis properly positioned, mean gradient 10 mm Hg across the prosthesis; slight regurgitation. LV systolic function mildly depressed; 0.45 LVEF.
Diagnosis: Calcific aortic stenosis, probably related to congenital bicuspid aortic valve, and valve replacement.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.
-- chars 3020 --

Comment: Greater exercise tolerance and less cardiomegaly for lower impairment. If reduced systolic function, increase impairment. Cardiac catheterization not necessary for estimate.
Consider surgical treatment.

Diagnosis: Aortic and mitral valve disease, probably rheumatic in origin; surgical replacement of valves.
Impairment Rating: 40% to 49% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Bruce protocol: class I if exertion
> 6 minutes; class II if 3 to 6 minutes; class III if 1 to 3 minutes; and class IV if < 1 minute.

Diagnosis: Mitral valve replacement with a prosthesis; LV dysfunction, with probable rheumatic origin.
Impairment Rating: 70% to 79% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Cardiac catheterization, though done, not essential for estimate.

--break--
3.3 Coronary Heart Disease
Coronary heart disease (CHD) is most commonly due to arteriosclerosis of the coronary arteries, resulting in reduced coronary blood flow. Other causes of limited or reduced coronary blood flow include coronary artery spasm, emboli, congenital abnormalities, and trauma. Inflammatory processes and arthritis also can obstruct the coronary arteries, especially the coronary ostia.

Reduced coronary flow resulting in transient ischemia or in permanent injury to the myocardium causes angina pectoris, which may impair a person’s ability to perform activities of daily living. Infarction or diffuse fibrosis and a decrease in EF causes permanent injury. The degree of the patient’s impairment is determined by the consequences of both the reduced coronary blood flow and the reduced ventricular function. In addition, reduced coronary blood flow and myocardial damage may cause cardiac arrhythmias. (See Section 3.6).9

The physician must obtain a detailed history to estimate the degree of impairment due to CHD. The physical examination contributes to the estimate of the disorder’s severity, and especially to the estimate of the degree of ventricular function impairment. In most individuals, laboratory studies will also be necessary. Studies obtained at rest, during exercise, and after exercise are especially useful in examining people suspected of having CHD. Knowledge of ventricular function should usually be obtained for all individuals. If there is a normal examination, normal heart size on chest x-ray, and normal resting ECG, the EF should be normal. Coronary angiography may be necessary in some.2,6, 10

Exercise training programs, cessation of cigarette smoking, use of medications, and surgical procedures can reduce but not eliminate impairment due to CHD. Allow sufficient time for these measures to have an effect before estimating permanent impairment.

--break--
3.3 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Coronary Heart Disease Impairment criteria for CHD are given in Table 3-6.

work. Follows diet to maintain weight of 72 kg (160 lb)—11 kg (24 lb) less than 1 year before. Asymptomatic; no medication.
Clinical Studies: Chest roentgenograms: normal. ECG: Q and flat T waves in 2, 3, and F. During exercise, HR: 152 BPM; BP: adequate rise.
-- chars 3081 --
ECG: no pattern changes to indicate ischemia or arrhythmias.
Diagnosis: Recent inferior-wall MI.
Impairment Rating: 10% to 19% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Greater impairment for uncomplicated recovery from anterior wall infarction, especially if LV systolic dysfunction.

Any of the exercise protocols in Table 3-2 may be used. The maximal and 90% of maximal predicted HR by age and sex group are presented in Table 3-7.

echocardiogram: reduced exercise tolerance; completed only 5.5 minutes on Bruce protocol. ECG with exercise: 4 mm of ST segment elevation.
Current Symptoms: Complained of exertional dyspnea after 20 minutes’ exercise and significant fatigue in office practice by early afternoon despite medication.
Physical Exam: BP: 98/60; PR: 68. No venous pressure elevation; large, sustained impulse above and lateral to the left nipple centered in the third intercostal space at the anterior axillary line. S gallop.
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram: anteroapical LV aneurysm at rest; EF: 0.35; fell to 0.25 with
exercise. Cardiac catheterization: occluded proximal LAD; no significant disease in LCx, RCA. Initially placed on an ACE inhibitor, nitrates, and low doses of furosemide and Coumadin. Low-salt diet. Beta-blocker 4 weeks later. ECG: 1-mm ST
segment elevation in V -V . Chest roentgenogram:

Cardiac enlargement; clear lung fields.
Diagnosis: Anterior LV aneurysm secondary to MI and CAD.
Impairment Rating: 45% to 49% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: LV aneurysm with secondary symptoms. Stable symptoms occurred with moderate activity. Maximal medical therapy. If symptoms worsen, future treatment includes aneurysm resection.

where. Chest roentgenogram: marked cardiomegaly; increased vascular markings in upper lung fields; small, right-sided pleural effusion.
Coronary angiography: total occlusion of LAD; 90% blockage right and circumflex coronary arteries. Patent grafts to RCA and one circumflex artery branch; no visualization of grafts to other circumflex artery branch and anterior descending artery. Ventriculogram: 0.20 EF; akinesis of entire anterior wall; poor contraction elsewhere.
Diagnosis: Angina pectoris and LV failure after coronary artery bypass surgery.
Impairment Rating: 90% to 100% impairment of
leads. Chest roentgenogram: marked cardiomegaly; upper lung fields vasculature prominent. During and after 2 minutes of exercise, pain
and ST depression in I, L, V , and V . EF: fell

the whole person.
Comment: Unable to perform most activities of daily living.

from 0.30 to 0.25 (multigated blood pool scan).
Diagnosis: Angina pectoris and LV failure due to CHD.
Impairment Rating: 75% to 90% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Needs assistance for most activities of daily living.

--break--
3.4 Congenital Heart Disease
Recently, surgical procedures designed to correct or improve the circulation of infants and children with congenital cardiac disorders have allowed many of the children to live to adulthood. Many of these surgically treated patients continue to have less than normal functioning of the heart and circulation and are therefore impaired.11
-- chars 3136 --

Congenital heart disease may be recognized by medical history and physical examination, but often the exact diagnosis and the individual’s functional

impairment require special studies, including ECG, chest roentgenogram, radioisotope studies, echocardiography, hemodynamic measurements, and angiography.12 The functional classification of cardiac disease found in Table 3-1 is used in the classification for congenital heart disease listed below in Table 3-8.

--break--
3.4 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Congenital Heart Disease
Impairment criteria for congenital heart disease are given in Table 3-8.

--break--
3/6 systolic murmur ends well short of S , loudest in second left intercostal space; early systolic click varies with respiration. No diastolic murmurs or gallops.
Clinical Studies: Chest roentgenogram: normal.
ECG: normal.
Diagnosis: Mild pulmonary valve stenosis.
Impairment Rating: 9% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Higher estimate if gradient > 40 mm Hg (Doppler echocardiography) or if ECG showed RV hypertrophy and a suitable surgical candidate. If asymptomatic with a small ventricular septal defect, estimate at upper end of class 1; but if bacterial endocarditis present, then estimate higher. If small atrial septal defect and normal pressures in all cardiac chambers and great vessels, or anomalous venous return from small lung segment, also estimate at upper end of class 1.

Comment: If shunt evidence, then impairment estimate higher. Also, if conduit or prosthesis in pulmonary outflow tract, or if significant symptoms, impairment estimate higher. Cardiac catheterization unnecessary for estimate.

Doppler: no right-to-left shunt. Cardiac catheterization, angiography: mean right atrial pressure 7 mm Hg; V waves 15 mm Hg. RVP and PAP: normal. No evidence of a shunt.
Diagnosis: Ebstein’s anomaly of the tricuspid valve.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person.

Comment: If right-to-left shunt, then estimate considerably higher. If symptomatic cardiac arrhythmia, then estimate impairment according to arrhythmia criteria and combine with congenital heart disease impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604). Cardiac catheterization unnecessary for estimate. Exercise testing might be useful for determining functional class.
Clinical Studies: ECG: right bundle-branch block; low R waves in V ; prominent P waves. Chest roentgenogram: greatly enlarged cardiac silhouette, especially right of the sternum. Pulmonary vasculature: normal. Echocardiogram: Ebstein’s anomaly of the tricuspid valve—typical changes. Doppler: small right-to-left shunt across atrial septum.
Diagnosis: Ebstein’s anomaly of the tricuspid valve.
Impairment Rating: 40% to 49% impairment of the whole person.

--break--
3.5  Cardiomyopathies
Cardiomyopathies, caused by a primary disease that affects the heart muscle, lead to impairment from abnormal ventricular function. Abnormal ventricular function may be the result of (1) systolic dysfunction, (2) diastolic dysfunction, or (3) a combination of both. An individual with these abnormalities may be asymptomatic or symptomatic due to pulmonary or systemic organ congestion and decreased cardiac output. In people with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, a dynamic outflow tract obstruction and secondary mitral regurgitation may cause symptoms of exertional dyspnea, angina, and syncope. Because some cardiomyopathies are reversible, every effort should be made to identify the reversible forms and to treat
-- chars 3513 --

them appropriately and prevent further deterioration. When the conditions are stable, the individual may be evaluated in terms of permanent impairment.13-18

Cardiomyopathies arise from many mechanisms, but the conditions may be divided into three major types:
(1) dilated or congestive, (2) hypertrophic, and
(3) restrictive. Careful history-taking and physical examination can reveal cardiomyopathies, but it is appropriate to confirm the diagnosis with echocardiography and selected laboratory studies.

--break--
3.5 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Cardiomyopathies Impairment criteria for cardiomyopathies are given in Table 3-9.

Diagnosis: Idiopathic cardiomyopathy.
Impairment Rating: 49% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Reduced exercise capacity; poor LV function.

--break--
3.6 Pericardial Heart Disease
Inflammation from diseases of the pericardium is associated with (1) systemic illnesses such as lupus erythematosus; (2) a reaction to mechanical forces, such as trauma or irradiation; (3) no obvious cause (idiopathic pericarditis); (4) infections, eg, viral, bacterial, fungal; or (5) open heart surgery (postcardiotomy syndrome). The pericardium may also be affected by tumors.

Recurrent pericarditis can lead to disabling episodes of fevers and pleuritic chest pain. Since chest pain is nonspecific, pericarditis evidence must be documented by echocardiography to show a pericardial effusion or by laboratory evidence of active inflammation, such as an increase in the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR).

Constrictive pericarditis is the most common pericardial disorder leading to permanent impairment; surgical removal of the thickened pericardium may significantly reduce symptoms and improve the overall condition of the individual. Before assessing permanent impairment, it is mandatory to allow sufficient time for the person to recover from a surgical procedure and to reach maximal medical improvement.

Pain and compromised cardiac function because of tamponade may cause some impairment, but they are rare as causes of permanent impairment. Recurrent episodes of pericarditis with tamponade or pericardial disease related to tumors may lead to permanent impairment. Allow adequate time for resolution of an acute illness, generally a period of months, before assessing permanent impairment.

Diagnosis of pericardial disease is made by historytaking; identifying a pericardial fraction rub or early diastolic pericardial knock; demonstrating pericardial effusion, thickening, or calcification on an echocardiogram; showing a thickened pericardium with computerized tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); or findings at cardiac catheterization.

--break--
3.6 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Pericardial Heart Disease
Criteria for evaluating permanent impairment related to pericardial heart disease are given in Table 3-10.

Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Self-limited illness; no effects on activities of daily living.
-- chars 3044 --

--break--
3.7  Arrhythmias
An arrhythmia is one or more heartbeats generated at a site other than the sinus node. An impulse generated in the sinus node but not transmitted normally through the conducting system is a conduction defect arrhythmia. Arrhythmias may occur in individuals with structurally and functionally normal hearts or in those with any type of organic heart disease.

Because arrhythmias tend to fluctuate remarkably in frequency, the physician must adequately document and estimate the frequency with which an arrhythmia occurs. The associated symptoms can include syncope, weakness and fatigue, palpitations, dizziness, lightheadedness, chest heaviness, and shortness of breath, alone or in any combination.

The degree of impairment from cardiac arrhythmias often has to be combined with the degree of impairment due to underlying heart disease and then calculated according to the Combined Values Chart (p. 604). Before estimating the degree of permanent impairment, allow adequate time for the individual’s condition to reach maximal medical improvement after instituting therapy.19

--break--
3.7 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Arrhythmias Criteria for evaluating impairments related to arrhythmias are given in Table 3-11.

--break--
3.8 Cardiovascular Impairment Evaluation Summary
See Table 3-12 for an evaluation summary for the assessment of cardiovascular impairment.

================================================================================
Chapter 4:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Cardiovascular System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries
4.1 Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease
4.2 Diseases of the Aorta
4.3 Vascular Diseases Affecting the Extremities
4.4 Diseases of the Pulmonary Arteries
4.5 Cardiovascular Impairment Evaluation Summary
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairments of the systemic and pulmonary arteries as they affect an individual’s ability to function and perform activities of daily living. The information regarding medical evaluation, analysis of findings, and impairment criteria in Chapter 3, The Cardiovascular System: Heart and Aorta, remain applicable for this chapter. See Table 3-1 for the functional classification of cardiac disease.

This chapter also integrates new findings in the rapidly changing specialty of cardiovascular disease. The following areas are new or revised from the fourth edition: (a) the addition of recent guidelines of the sixth report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC-6)1; (b) an expanded section on pulmonary hypertension that outlines guides for impairment assessment; and (c) the latest data for prognosis of individuals with pulmonary hypertension.
--break--
4.1 Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease
The JNC-6 classifies hypertension, or elevated blood pressure, as an elevation of the systolic blood pressure to ? 140 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure to
-- chars 3065 --
>89 mm Hg on two or more separate readings.1 (See Table 4-1 for the JNC-6 three-stage hypertension classification.) Hypertension, the leading cause of ambulatory office visits in the United States, can produce heart disease, stroke, and renal failure. The economic impact of heart disease and stroke exceeds
$29 billion annually in the United States. The prevalence of hypertension and its complications make it a major public health concern, particularly in the Southeast and among African Americans.2,3


Hypertensive heart disease includes hypertension, hypertension-associated systolic and diastolic heart failure (HF), hypertension-associated angina, and hypertension-induced left ventricular (LV)
hypertrophy. Hypertensive heart disease can be very debilitating and demands aggressive treatment.
Preventive treatment strategies may reduce the risk of developing secondary cardiac changes, the symptoms associated with hypertension, and other organ dysfunction.4-7

--break--
4.1 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease
Table 4-2 addresses the impairment classification for hypertensive cardiovascular disease. Cardiovascular complications of hypertension should be established before assigning a diagnosis of hypertensive cardiovascular disease. Because patients with hypertensive cardiovascular disease do not become symptomatic until the very late stages, the impairment classification requires information on the end-organ damage that may occur even in the absence of symptoms.

Diagnosis: Essential hypertension.
Impairment Rating: 1% to 3% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Mild hypertension; check BP after medication.

Physical Exam: BP: 170/95 mm Hg in both arms; PR: 64 BPM. No signs of congestive heart failure (CHF). Fundus: increased light reflexes from arterioles and arteriovenous crossing depressions; no hemorrhages or exudates. Disk flat. Enlarged, sustained LV impulse in normal position. Normal S ;
increased in intensity; S present.
Clinical Studies: ECG: LV hypertrophy; tall R and inverted T waves in lateral chest leads. Chest roentgenogram: mild cardiomegaly; pulmonary vasculature normal. Serum electrolyte levels and urinalysis: normal.
Diagnosis: Essential hypertension and hypertensive heart disease with documented LV hypertrophy.
Impairment Rating: 30% to 39% impairment of the whole person.

Impairment Rating: 55% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Lower impairment if diastolic pressure, renal function return to normal but not if any of other findings persist.
and V through V . Chest roentgenogram: cardiomegaly; pulmonary vasculature prominent in upper lung fields. Serum electrolyte, BUN, creatinine levels, and urinalysis: normal.
Echocardiogram: increased wall thickness; dilated LV cavity with global hypokinesis; 0.30 EF.
Diagnosis: Essential hypertension with CHF.
Impairment Rating: 80% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Lower impairment after hypertension treatment if improvement in HF symptoms and EF. Note: Impairment class corresponds to cardiomyopathy impairment in Chapter 3. Here, the class 4 impairment for hypertensive cardiovascular disease (CVD) is not combined with cardiomyopathy since hypertensive CVD class 4 includes cardiomyopathy.
-- chars 3265 --

--break--
4.2 Diseases of the Aorta
Diseases of the aorta, less prevalent than heart disease, can be more acutely life threatening. Diseases of the aorta include atherosclerotic dilatation, dilatation and/or stenosis from a concurrent connective tissue disease or vasculitis, and atheroembolic complications from diffuse aortic atherosclerosis.

Aortic atherosclerotic dilatation can progress to a significant degree and cause dyspnea, wheezing, cough, recurrent pneumonia, and hemoptysis. Aortic dilatation can be associated with significant aortic regurgitation and can also enlarge to the point of rupture and death.

The physician must obtain a careful and detailed history to estimate aortic involvement. Physical examination and chest roentgenogram may suggest aortic enlargement, but often a more advanced imaging assessment is necessary. MRI, CT scan, and transesophageal imaging identify aortic aneurysms, aortic vasculitic involvement, and atheromatous emboli sources. Laboratory studies help establish the presence of atheroemboli.8-13

--break--
4.2 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Diseases of the Aorta See Table 4-3 for the classification of whole person impairment due to diseases of the aorta.

--break--
4.3 Vascular Diseases Affecting the Extremities
Peripheral vascular disease (PVD) that leads to permanent impairment usually includes (1) arterial disorders that reduce blood flow and lead to one or more of the following: intermittent claudication, pain at rest, minor trophic changes, ulceration, gangrene, extremity loss, or Raynaud’s phenomenon; (2) venous disorders that lead to one or more of the following: pain, edema, induration, stasis dermatitis, or ulceration; or (3) lymphatic disorders that lead to chronic lymphedema and may be complicated by recurrent acute infection.

Arterial disorders are most commonly caused by arteriosclerosis, trauma, and inflammatory processes such as thromboangiitis obliterans. The venous system is most frequently affected by varicose veins, thrombosis, and chronic deep venous insufficiency. The lymphatic system may become impaired by inflammatory or neoplastic processes.

Noninvasive laboratory studies are valuable in confirming occlusive arterial disease or venous abnormalities of the extremities. To estimate functional impairment due to occlusive peripheral arterial disease, determine ankle or arm systolic pressure indices before, and 1 minute after, standard exercise (eg, walking on a treadmill at 2 miles per hour at a 10% grade for 5 minutes, or something less strenuous if the individual’s symptoms warrant it).14, 15

Before evaluating impairment, establish a specific diagnosis of vascular disease. The impairment estimate depends on the extent, severity, and impact of the lesions rather than on the specific diagnosis.

Table 4-4 provides a classification of impairments due to peripheral vascular disease. Physical signs of vascular damage must be present and are the primary

determinants in placing the the examinee into one of these classes. Raynaud’s phenomenon consists of localized blanching of one or more fingers, followed by a period of cyanosis, followed by erythema. Pain on exposure to cold or generalized paleness of the fingers on exposure to cold do not in themselves indicate Raynuad’s. When amputation due to peripheral vascular disease is involved, the impairment due to amputation should be evaluated separately and combined with the appropriate value in Table 4-4 using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
-- chars 3531 --

It is important to differentiate Raynaud’s symptoms on the basis of obstructive physiology from those occurring because of vasoreactivity. Individuals with obstructive physiology will often experience symptoms more frequently and to a greater degree of severity. Establish the presence of obstructive physiology by objective testing. Arterial pressure ratios between the affected digits and the brachial pressure (finger/brachial index) are easily performed. A ratio of < 0.8 suggests obstructive physiology, even if Raynaud’s symptoms are not present. Obstuctive physiology can also be established by the use of cutaneous laser Doppler flowmetry. This technique is established and can reliably assess microcirculation performance and real time changes in skin blood flow.16

--break--
4.3 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Vascular Diseases Affecting the Extremities
The criteria for evaluating impairment due to vascular diseases of the upper extremity are found in Table 4-4; for lower extremity, Table 4-5.

To translate an upper extremity impairment into a whole person impairment, multiply the upper
extremity impairment by 0.6 or use Table 16-3 in the upper extremities chapter. To translate the lower extremity impairment to a whole person impairment, multiply the lower impairment by 0.4, or use Table 17-3 in the lower extremities chapter.

--break--
4.4 Diseases of the Pulmonary Arteries
Primary pulmonary hypertension is a consequence of obliterative and plexiform changes of unknown etiology in the pulmonary arteriolar bed. Many other causes of pulmonary hypertension include pulmonary parenchymal disease, left-sided HF, CHF, and PVD (either from pulmonary emboli or systemic disease). Pulmonary venous and capillary system disorders can also produce pulmonary hypertension. All of these disorders are classified disorders of the pulmonary circulation for impairment assessment.

The physician should take a careful history of functional impairment and symptoms for individuals with pulmonary hypertension. Classic findings include a right ventricular (RV) lift and an increased intensity of the S pulmonic component. Pulmonary hypertension is often diagnosed by chest roentgenogram changes, RV hypertrophy, or ECG strain. The definitive

assessment of pulmonary hypertension is made by PAP assessment with an echocardiogram or right heart catheterization.17-20

--break--
4.4 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Pulmonary Hypertension
The degree of pulmonary hypertension can be classified by the measurement of PAP or PA resistance.
Impairment classification should be based on more than the observed PAP; also consider the presence or absence of signs and symptoms of right HF. Dyspnea is the most limiting symptom of pulmonary hypertension. Cyanosis may occur from right to left shunting, especially in individuals with pulmonary hypertension associated with CHF.

Table 4-6 lists the impairment criteria for disorders of the pulmonary circulation. (The Guides follows the new World Health Organization [WHO] criteria for pulmonary hypertension classification.21)
-- chars 3115 --

--break--
4.5 Cardiovascular Impairment Evaluation Summary

See Table 4.7 for an evaluation summary for the assessment of systemic and pulmonary artery cardiovascular impairment.

================================================================================
Chapter 5:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Respiratory System
5.1 Principles of Assessment
5.2 Symptoms Associated With Respiratory Disease
5.3 Tobacco Use and Environmental Exposure Associated With Respiratory Disease
5.4 Examinations, Clinical Studies, and Other Tests for Evaluating Respiratory Disease
5.5 Asthma
5.6 Obstructive Sleep Apnea
5.7 Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis
5.8 Pneumoconiosis
5.9 Lung Cancer
5.10 Permanent Impairment Due to Respiratory Disorders
5.11 Respiratory Impairment Evaluation Summary
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairment of the respiratory system as it affects overall lung function and the ability to per-
form the activities of daily living. The respiratory system includes the tracheobronchial tree, pulmonary parenchyma, and ribcage.

The following sections have been revised for the fifth edition: (1) criteria for asthma impairment were updated to incorporate guidelines recently published by the American Thoracic Society (ATS)1; (2) respiratory impairment criteria now incorporate the lower limits of normal2 for forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1), and diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DCO); and (3) the section on sleep apnea has been updated to reflect current assessment and practice.
--break--
5.1 Principles of Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluations.

The purpose of respiratory impairment assessment is to determine if a permanent respiratory impairment exists, quantify its severity, assess its impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living, and, if possible, identify the cause of the abnormality and recommend measures to prevent further impairment and ensure optimum function.

An impairment, as stated in Chapter 1, is “a loss, loss of use, or derangement of any body part, organ system, or organ function” (Table 1-1). Not all impairments result in a functional loss or affect the ability to perform activities of daily living. Respiratory impairments that produce a decrement of lung function and affect the ability to perform activities of daily living are assigned an impairment rating. For example, an anatomic change such as a circumscribed pleural plaque would be an impairment based on an abnormality in anatomic structure. However, if there were no abnormality in lung function and no decrease in the ability to perform activities of daily living, the individual would be assigned a 0% impairment rating.
-- chars 3131 --

Changes in organ function are the primary criteria for determining the impairment class. To establish the specific impairment percentage, consider both the severity and prognosis of the condition and how the impairment affects the individual’s ability to perform the activities of daily living listed in Table 1-2. Table 5-13 is provided at the end of the chapter to ensure all pertinent information is included in the respiratory assessment.

Begin the evaluation with an inquiry into specific symptoms and their severity, duration, and manner of onset. Since environmental exposure frequently leads to symptomatic complaints, it is important to determine if the individual’s personal habits or surroundings, such as cigarette smoking and workplace exposures, explain or contribute to the symptoms. A thorough history enables the examiner to direct the physical examination to areas of concern and then identify the most useful diagnostic and evaluative studies. For instance, structural and movement disorders of the chest wall or diaphragm found on physical examination would prompt different investigations than an observation of wheezing. Radiographic techniques such as chest roentgenograms or computed tomography (CT) scans help elucidate anatomic abnormalities that are sometimes diagnostic of specific disease processes. To assess impairment, weigh both subjective and objective information derived from thorough history-taking, physical examination, imaging and laboratory studies, and pulmonary function tests. These complementary evaluation techniques enable the examiner to obtain an accurate and thorough view of the impairment’s nature, as well as the individual’s limitations and ability to perform activities of daily living.

--break--
5.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs Symptomatic assessment of individuals with respiratory disease is diagnostically useful, but it provides limited quantitative information and should not serve as the sole criterion upon which to make decisions about impairment. Rather, the examiner should obtain objective data about the extent of the limitation and integrate those findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent impairment.

--break--
5.1 b Description of Clinical Studies Clinical studies used to assess pulmonary impairment include radiographs; other imaging studies, including CT scans and MR images; pulmonary function tests; and exercise testing. Pulmonary function tests are the most useful in assessing functional changes.

--break--
5.2 Symptoms Associated With Respiratory Disease
The major symptoms of pulmonary disease include dyspnea; cough, sputum production, and hemoptysis; wheezing; and chest pain or tightness. The examiner needs to document these symptoms and their course over time, and correlate the symptoms with objective studies to assess their importance and implications. The significance of respiratory symptoms is better understood when integrated with findings from more objective measures such as the physical examination, radiography, lung function, and laboratory studies.
-- chars 3093 --

--break--
5.2 a Dyspnea
Dyspnea is the most common symptom noted on initial examination of individuals with any type of pulmonary impairment. Despite its importance, dyspnea is nonspecific; it is often caused by cardiac, hematologic, metabolic, or neurologic disease, or by anxiety or physical deconditioning.

Dyspnea can be evaluated and quantitated using several systems. The most widely used classification system, developed with the ATS, (Table 5-1), is based on the American Thoracic Society/Division of Lung Diseases Respiratory Symptom questionnaire.3 The ATS classification is best used in conjunction with more objective respiratory function measurements. If a disparity is found between subjective complaints of dyspnea and findings on respiratory testing, consider a nonrespiratory dyspnea component.4

--break--
5.2
b Cough, Sputum Production, and Hemoptysis
Coughing can be an important indicator of respiratory tract disease, although it is difficult to quantify and not easily measured. Document its presence or absence, whether it is productive or nonproductive of sputum, its relationship to work or other activities, its duration, its association with hemoptysis, and whether further investigation is warranted.

An acute, self-limited cough is most commonly due to infection or irritation. A subacute or recurrent, nonproductive cough may be a manifestation of asthma and should be investigated with pulmonary function testing. A chronic, productive cough may indicate bronchitis. According to ATS criteria, the term chronic bronchitis may be used to describe a sputum-producing cough that occurs on most days for at least 3 consecutive months a year for at least 2 consecutive years.4

Hemoptysis frequently accompanies bronchitis and pneumonia, usually as blood-streaked sputum.
Serious conditions that often manifest with hemoptysis include bronchogenic carcinoma, pulmonary emboli, bronchiectasis, tuberculosis, aspergilloma, and arteriovenous malformations. At a minimum, hemoptysis requires radiologic evaluation that may uncover respiratory or other impairment-producing types of diseases.

--break--
5.2 c Wheezing
Subjects with partial airway obstruction often report high-pitched, musical sounds, or wheezing. These sounds can be generated at any point along the respiratory tract from the glottis to the bronchioles.
Inspiratory wheezing, or stridor, suggests laryngeal disease; expiratory wheezing indicates bronchospasm or localized bronchial narrowing.
Information about seasonal wheezing is also diagnostically significant. Wheezing and/or cough occurring primarily in the workplace or having a definite temporal relationship to work suggests occupational asthma; wheezing that follows several minutes of exercise suggests exercise-induced asthma; and wheezing that usually accompanies respiratory tract infections is classified as asthmatic bronchitis. While these different varieties of asthma are commonly described as separate entities, there is substantial overlap among the syndromes. This is due to the underlying commonalities of airway hyperresponsiveness in all types of asthma.
-- chars 3125 --

--break--
5.2 d Thoracic Cage Abnormalities
Osseous spine abnormalities may produce respiratory impairment due to mechanical factors involving the size of the chest cavity and restriction of rib motion. Kyphoscoliosis, the most common of these abnormalities, is characterized by curvature of the vertebral column from side to side in the frontal plane (scoliosis) and from the dorsal to the ventral aspect of the sagittal plane (kyphosis). The Cobb method is the most common measurement tool for curvature severity. With this method, posteroanterior and lateral spinal radiographs measure the curvature angles. Only severe curvature angles—that is, Cobb angles that are greater than 100°—are likely to lead to respiratory failure. Even when there are severe spinal deformities, respiratory decompensation usually does not occur until middle age or later.

With severe spinal abnormalities, respiratory compromise is produced by the combined effects of restricted lung volume, decreased cross-sectional area of the vascular bed, and age-related decrease in chest wall compliance. Progressive stiffness of the chest wall with advancing age increases the work of breathing and leads to hypoventilation, which produces hypoxia and hypercapnia. Hypoxia is a powerful pulmonary vasoconstrictor and further decreases the vascular cross-sectional area, eventually leading to cor pulmonale. Judge the severity of respiratory impairment on the criteria described in the sections on forced respiratory maneuvers (5.4d), diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (5.4e), and the criteria for rating impairment due to respiratory disease (5.4g) in this chapter.

--break--
5.3 Tobacco Use and Environmental Exposure Associated With Respiratory Disease
--break--
5.3 a Tobacco Use
Exposure to tobacco smoke is a common cause of respiratory impairment. Although susceptibility to the adverse effects of cigarette smoke varies, there is a discernible dose-response relationship. The examiner

should ask the individual’s current age; the age at which he or she started smoking; the average number of packs smoked per day if the smoking has continued; and, if the person quit smoking at any time, the age and date he or she quit smoking.

Multiply the number of years of smoking by the number of packs smoked per day to produce the standard measure of pack-years of cigarette smoking. Use this information to assess the impact of personal habits on respiratory impairment. Cigarette smoking is the most frequent causative factor in the development of chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and lung cancer, and it can exacerbate asthma. Chronic exposure to environmental tobacco smoke may also be a factor in the origin of lung cancer, and it can also exacerbate asthma. Smoking cessation should be noted since it often benefits respiratory status.
Although the anatomic abnormalities of emphysema are irreversible, both bronchospasm and productive cough can be favorably affected by the discontinuation of cigarette use. In addition, risk of bronchogenic carcinoma decreases progressively in the first 10 to 15 years after quitting smoking. After that time, the risk stabilizes at a point slightly higher than that of someone who has never smoked.5
-- chars 3223 --

--break--
5.3 b Environmental Exposure Environmental exposures in the workplace often are cited as causative or contributory factors in the development of respiratory impairment. It is impor-
tant to obtain a complete occupational history from the individual to evaluate the possible effect of these exposures. A chief component of the history contains a chronological description of work activities beginning with the first year of employment and includes names of employers, the specific types of work performed, the materials used by the person, and the potentially toxic materials present in the workplace. Employers are required to maintain a list (made available to the employee and the treating physician in the form of Material Safety Data Sheets) of potentially toxic materials used in the workplace, their chemical descriptions, and their physical and health hazards. This information can be quite helpful to the examiner to direct the diagnostic and evaluative process. To assess its significance, ask the individual to estimate the frequency and intensity of exposure to each substance, as well as information about the use of respiratory protective devices.

Respiratory injuries in the workplace can occur in several different patterns, depending on the nature of the inhaled material and the circumstances of exposure. Acute lung injury may be the result of inhalation of a highly irritative gas, fume, mist, or vapor that results in noncardiogenic pulmonary edema or acute respiratory distress syndrome. If the individual survives the acute lung injury, the healing process may produce diffuse pulmonary fibrosis or obliterative bronchiolitis, which may lead to functional impairment. Depending on the nature, duration, and intensity of exposure, inhalation of irritative substances can cause subsequent persistent problems such as chronic bronchitis and airway hyperreactivity. Allergic pulmonary reactions can result from inhalation of organic material or certain types of reactive chemical molecules, causing asthma or hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Inhalation of fibrogenic dust can cause pneumoconiosis over a prolonged period. Workplace exposures can also exacerbate underlying conditions such as asthma, chronic bronchitis, or emphysema.

In addition to information on workplace exposure, inquire about home and environmental exposure (including hobbies or leisure time activities) to organic and inorganic agents such as allergens, bioaerosols, paints, glues, or pesticides. In the home, exposure to pets and use of cool-mist vaporizers, humidifiers, and indoor hot tubs also may be associated with respiratory disease.

--break--
5.4 Examinations, Clinical Studies, and Other Tests for Evaluating Respiratory Disease
--break--
5.4 a Physical Examination
Although a thorough physical examination is mandatory to reach valid conclusions about an individual’s impairment, certain portions of the examination are particularly pertinent in evaluating the respiratory system. Observe and record respiratory rate, use of accessory muscles, and body habitus. Noisy breath sounds are a physical finding that may indicate
-- chars 3137 --

airflow obstruction. A breathing pattern characterized by pursed lip breathing during expiration suggests chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Inspect the thoracic cage for vertebral or rib cage deformity and movement of the ribs with inspiration and expiration. A barrel-shaped chest may indicate hyperinflation. Percuss the chest to ascertain hyperresonance or consolidation and assess diaphragmatic motion.

Chest auscultation detects decreased breath sounds, crackles, wheezes, or rhonchi. Describe the intensity, quality, and location of these, as well as whether they are heard during inspiration, expiration, or both.
Inspiratory crackles, heard in two thirds of people with chronic interstitial lung disease, may be associated with restrictive respiratory impairment. Wheezes and rhonchi are indicative of bronchial abnormalities and are often accompanied by obstructive airway disease. Auscultate during both quiet breathing and forced expiration before excluding wheezing.
Diffuse, bilateral, expiratory wheezing indicates generalized bronchospasm, while unilateral or localized wheezing may be caused by partial bronchial obstruction due to an endobronchial tumor or mucus plugging. Early inspiratory crackles or opening snaps may be heard in diseases of airflow obstruction and particularly in bronchiolitis obliterans.

Cyanosis, indicated by a bluish tint of the lips and nail beds, is a striking but unreliable indicator of severe pulmonary impairment. Poor lighting in the examination room, anemia, and skin pigmentation can interfere with assessment of severity. Suspicion of cyanosis calls for pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas analysis.

Digital clubbing is characterized by loss of the angle at the junction of the cuticle and the nail, softening of the nail bed, increased curvature of the nails, and widening of the distal portions of the fingers and toes. Chest diseases associated with clubbing include pulmonary fibrosis, bronchiectasis, bronchogenic carcinoma, pleural tumors, lung abscess, empyema, and cyanotic congenital heart disease.

--break--
5.4 b Chest Roentgenograms
The initial radiographic examination should include posteroanterior and lateral views of the chest taken in full inspiration. Chest radiographic findings often correlate poorly with physiologic findings in diseases with airflow limitation, such as asthma and emphysema. Chronic radiographic abnormalities of the chest may be classified as parenchymal, bronchovascular, cardiovascular, pleural, or osseous. Mediastinal or tracheal changes may be observed. Terms used to describe parenchymal changes can be classified as hyperinflation, fibrosis, cavitary, or cystic.

Hyperinflation is characteristic of airway obstruction. Radiographic findings of hyperinflation are seen in airway obstruction, while volume restriction is associated with fibrosis, loss of chest wall compliance, or severe neuromuscular weakness. Severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is manifested radiographically by diaphragm flattening, attenuation of pulmonary vasculature within the parenchyma, increased anteroposterior diameter of the chest, and increased retrosternal air space. An individual with an acute asthmatic attack can have radiographic evidence of hyperinflation without parenchymal vascular attenuation; when the asthmatic attack dissipates, the radiographic appearance reverts to normal.
-- chars 3399 --

Diffuse fibrotic changes in the pulmonary parenchyma may appear linear (streaky) and/or nodular (rounded). Specific diagnostic information is obtained by noting both the type and the predominant location of fibrotic changes and whether they are focal or diffuse. For example, silicosis is manifested by nodular opacities that predominate in the upper portions of the chest, while asbestosis is manifested by linear opacities that typically are most marked in lower portions of the lungs. Pleural changes such as pleural plaques may also be present in individuals with asbestosis or may be the sole manifestation of past asbestos exposure.

The International Labor Organization (ILO) adopted a standardized method of classifying radiographic abnormalities associated with fibrotic changes caused by pneumoconiosis.6 The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) regularly administers a course and examination to certify knowledge and proficiency in the use of this method. Information on courses and programs can be obtained from the NIOSH Division of Respiratory Disease Studies, Morgantown, WVa, or by calling 800 35-NIOSH.

Evidence of cardiovascular abnormalities associated with chronic pulmonary disease is suggested when chest films show evidence of pulmonary hypertension and/or cor pulmonale. Pulmonary hypertension is indicated by enlargement of pulmonary arteries in the hila and rapid tapering of the peripheral vessels. Cor pulmonale presents as an enlargement of the right ventricle and the radiographic indicators of pulmonary hypertension. The presence of pulmonary hypertension and/or cor pulmonale and the severity of those processes may need to be confirmed by additional clinical and laboratory tests.

--break--
5.4c Computed Tomography
Computed tomography (CT) and high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) are radiographic techniques than can augment the standard chest radiograph and are more sensitive in evaluating certain pulmonary diseases such as asbestosis. Conventional CT is obtained using 10-mm-thick slices through various lung fields. This technique is good for evaluating nodules with high radiographic attenuation.
The HRCT, which consists of 1to 2-mm thick slices every 10 mm, is useful for evaluating changes with low radiographic attenuation such as early interstitial lung disease. The standard CT and/or HRCT can provide greater accuracy as part of a thorough assessment of the pulmonary parenchyma. It should be noted that, in general, the HRCT delivers significantly less whole body effective dose radiation than the standard CT.

With regard to airway disease, HRCT can detect early changes in the lung consistent with focal emphysema; regional air trapping associated with small airway disease, such as obliterative bronchiolitis; and large airway abnormalities, such as bronchiectasis. For example, air trapping of the type seen with obliterative bronchiolitis is best demonstrated by comparing full inspiratory and full expiratory scans. Prone and supine position scans also are helpful in distinguishing hydrostatic changes related to blood volume that are transient and can occur in the dependent position of the lungs from fixed parenchymal abnormalities.7,8
-- chars 3231 --

--break--
5.4d Forced Expiratory Maneuvers (Simple Spirometry)
Pulmonary function tests, performed on standardized equipment with validated administration techniques, provide the framework for evaluation of respiratory system impairment. Spirometric testing equipment, calibration, and administration techniques must conform to the guidelines of the 1994 ATS Statement on Standardization of Spirometry.9–15

If tolerated by the individual, remove pulmonary medications up to 24 hours before spirometry or methacholine challenge testing to assess pulmonary function without the effects of medication.

Forced expiratory maneuver measurements are made from at least three acceptable spirometric tracings that demonstrate uniformity pertaining to both the

expiratory flow pattern and concordance of at least two of the test results within 5% of each other.
Measurements include the following: forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1), and the ratio of these measurements (FEV1/FVC). Use the tracings with the highest FVC and FEV1 to calculate the FEV1/FVC ratio, even if these measurements occur on different expiratory efforts.12-14,16

Repeat spirometry after bronchodilator administration if FEV1/FVC is below 0.70 or if there is wheezing on physical examination. Use the spirogram indicating the best effort, before or after administration of a bronchodilator, to determine FVC and FEV1 for impairment assessment. Postbronchodilator FEV1 and FVC are important in understanding potential medication responsiveness and prognosis.12,14,17,18

IC = inspiratory capacity; VC = vital capacity; TLC = total lung capacity; RV = residual volume; ERV = expiratory reserve volume.

To use pulmonary function measures, obtain measurements of the FVC, FEV, and DCO and compare these to the predicted normal values as presented in Tables 5-2a through 5-7a. For the average or mean predicted normal value, find the individual’s age in the left-hand column and height along the top row; the predicted value lies at the intersection of the appropriate row and column. In addition, identify the lower limit of normal for the measure of interest by using Tables 5-2b through 5-7b. The lower limit of normal has been calculated based upon the standard convention of the lower limit of normal lying at the fifth percentile, below the upper 95% of the reference population, according to recommendations from the ATS.13,14 The lower limits of normal are used to distinguish between class 1 and class 2 respiratory impairment in Table 5-12.

North American whites have larger spirometric values for a given age, height, and gender than North American blacks, with a similar tendency noted for Hispanics, Native Americans, and Asians. Population values of normal lung function have been identified for blacks. The ATS Task Force for Interpretation of Pulmonary Function recommends an adjustment on a population basis for predicted lung function in blacks. Multiply values for predicted normal FVC (Tables
-- chars 3023 --
--break--
5-2a and 5-3a) by 0.88; for predicted normal FEV1 (Tables 5-4a and 5-5a) by 0.88; and for normal single-breath DCO (Tables 5-6a and 5-7a) by 0.93. In cases where the correction value may not apply, the examiner may choose not to use this correction and instead may provide an explanation why it is inappropriate. Reliable population data are not yet available for other ethnic groups, such as Hispanics, Native Americans, and Asians. For these ethnic groups, the values for North American whites may be used.16,19–21

The FEV1/FVC ratio helps diagnose obstructive airway disease. However, according to the most recent ATS statement on pulmonary function testing interpretation, the absolute volume or the percentage of predicted value of FEV1 is the primary parameter for assessing severity of obstruction, although the FEV1/FVC may be helpful.13 Rather, judge severity on the absolute value or the percentage of predicted value of FEV1.

--break--
5.4e Diffusing Capacity for Carbon Monoxide (DCO)
Use single-breath DCO to evaluate all levels of impairment. The single-breath DCO testing method is described in a 1995 ATS statement.14,22 The DCO
measurement provides information about gas transfer efficiency across the lungs.23 Several physiologic factors affect the gas transfer process, including alveolar-capillary membrane thickness, available gas exchange surface area, gas solubility, pulmonary capillary blood volume, hematocrit, test gas concentration gradient across the alveolar-capillary membrane, and hemoglobin-binding site availability.

Mechanical factors that affect DCO results include test gas inhalation speed, inspiration depth, period of breath holding, and expiration speed. While mechanical factors generally are controlled by DCO test automation, extrapulmonary factors are important to ascertain proper interpretation. For example, cigarette smoking can elevate the blood’s carbon monoxide levels, causing as much as 10% to 12% hemoglobin saturation and decreasing DCO. Instruct the individual not to smoke for at least 8 hours before the test.

See Tables 5-6a and 5-7a for reference values for population-based predicted normal diffusing capacity. Use these tables in a manner similar to the spirometry tables. A laboratory that tests DCO under conditions or with procedures different than that recommended by the ATS should either develop and verify its own prediction equations or use an accepted and verified equation.

See Table 5-12 for classification of respiratory impairment based on the testing results of FVC, FEV1, FEV1/FVC, and DCO. Also consider the possible contribution of extrapulmonary factors to respiratory system impairment. For example, morbid obesity may decrease FVC, and anemia may decrease DCO. Evaluate other organ system impairments according to the criteria given in other Guides chapters and combine those impairment ratings with the respiratory system impairment rating (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

Table 5-7b Predicted Lower Limit of Normal Diffusing Capacity for Carbon Monoxide (DCO) for Women*
-- chars 3080 --

--break--
5.4f Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing Cardiopulmonary exercise testing is sometimes useful in assessing whether an individual’s complaint of dyspnea (see Table 5-1) is a result of respiratory or other conditions. A person’s cardiac and conditioning status must be considered in performing the test and in interpreting the results.

The cardiopulmonary exercise gas-exchange measurement can be an additional means of assessing the severity and cause of exercise intolerance.
Simultaneous measurement of carbon dioxide (CO2) production, minute ventilation, and heart rate allows determination of whether exercise capacity limitation is due to cardiac, pulmonary, or coexisting impairments. When properly performed and interpreted, these tests can help differentiate pulmonary impairment from cardiac impairment or physical deconditioning effects.24

Exercise capacity is measured by oxygen consumption per unit time (V?O2) in milliliters per kilogram multiplied by minutes (mL/[kg•min]) or in metabolic equivalents (METS), a unit of expended energy equal to 3.5 mL/(kg•min) oxygen consumption. MET is discussed in Chapter 3 in the sections on the heart and aorta. Generally, an individual can sustain a work level equal to 40% of his or her measured maximum V?O2 for an 8-hour period.25 Table 5-8 shows the relationship between work intensity and oxygen consumption.

Use cardiopulmonary exercise testing judiciously since these studies can be difficult to perform, are more expensive, and are sometimes more invasive than conventional tests. Ordinarily, exercise capacity measurements are not used to study individuals with normal results on routine pulmonary function tests. However, they can be helpful when the results of pulmonary function tests do not correlate with the

individual’s symptoms or when additional information is needed to clarify the nature and severity of an impairment.27 Do not use exercise capacity measurements to study individuals with medical contraindications such as unstable cardiac disease.

Arterial Blood Gas Analysis
Because of its invasive nature, use arterial blood gas analysis only when necessary to evaluate pulmonary impairment. Arterial blood gas analysis results may be outside the normal range for reasons other than pulmonary disease. For most individuals with obstructive lung disease, exercise capacity correlates better with FEV1 than arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PO2). For purposes of evaluating permanent impairment, hypoxia must be measured on two separate occasions at least 4 weeks apart.

Pulse oximetry, which is less invasive than arterial blood gas, often provides an adequate estimate of hypoxia. Arterial blood gases, although more invasive, provide a more accurate measurement of hypoxia. Physicians should use their clinical judgment as to which measurement is needed, based on individual assessment.

An arterial blood gas determination may indicate the presence of severe impairment even when a person’s condition is stable and he or she is receiving optimal therapy. An arterial PO2 of less than 55 mm Hg is evidence of severe impairment when an individual is examined at rest while breathing room air at sea level. Severe impairment may also be diagnosed with an arterial PO2 of less than 60 mm Hg if the person also has one or more of the following conditions: pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale, increasingly severe hypoxia during exercise testing, or erythrocytosis.
-- chars 3456 --

--break--
5.4g Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Respiratory Disease
Table 5-12 presents criteria for estimating the permanent impairment rating for different respiratory conditions, discussed below. Perform spirometry and DCO on each person being evaluated.3 V?O2max may provide additional information in selected individuals when indicated. The person must meet all of the listed criteria except for V?O2max in order to be considered nonimpaired. At least one of the listed criteria must be fulfilled to place an individual in any class with an impairment rating. As discussed in Chapter 1, in individuals where the preinjury or preillness values differ from the population-listed values, the examiner

may depart from the population-listed normal values for determining an impairment rating, using the preinjury and preillness “normal” value, and explain the reason for the departure.

--break--
5.5  Asthma
Asthma is an airway inflammatory disease characterized by episodic and variable airflow limitation and airway hyperresponsiveness. A diagnosis of asthma requires relevant symptoms (eg, cough, sputum, wheeze, chest tightness, or breathlessness) and either evidence of airflow obstruction that is partially or completely reversible (either spontaneously or after treatment) or airway reactivity to methacholine or histamine in the absence of airflow limitation.10

Variable airflow obstruction can be detected with pulmonary function testing, which shows a reversible obstructive airway pattern. Airway hyperresponsiveness is detected by bronchial challenge testing with methacholine or histamine.28 Airway hyperresponsiveness is defined as a positive methacholine or histamine challenge, as reflected by a decrease in FEV1 of 20% (PC20) from baseline, upon provocation with less than or equal to 8 mg/mL of methacholine or histamine using the tidal breathing method or its equivalent.1,18 The results from methacholine testing should be expressed as the provocation concentration to cause a fall in FEV1 of 20% (PC20).
While different varieties of asthma exist, they all share an underlying commonality of airway hyperresponsiveness. Occupational asthma represents a special subset of asthma subjects. This abnormality has now surpassed pneumoconiosis as the most commonly reported occupational lung disease linked to a particular occupational environment or agent. Besides directly causing occupational asthma, work exposures can acutely exacerbate an underlying asthmatic condition, which can subsequently return to preexposure baseline status with removal from exposure. Work exposures can also cause a more permanent change in an underlying asthmatic condition, which can persist even after removal from exposure. If an individual’s asthma is worsening at work, it is important to remove the individual from exposure or, at a minimum, reduce exposure and reevaluate his or her condition when it has

stabilized. Although prevention is optimal, medication can substantially modify symptoms and the clinical course of asthma.
-- chars 3043 --

Occupational asthma can be caused by sensitizers or irritants. Sensitizers are classified as either high molecular weight or low molecular weight. High-molecularweight sensitizers of animal or plant origin include animal dander or grain dust. Low-molecular-weight sensitizers, typically organic or inorganic chemicals, include diisocyanates. Sensitizers generally require a latency period for the development of immunologic responsiveness. This latency period may last from a few weeks to several years after first exposure.29

In the case of sensitizer-induced asthma (such as toluene diisocyanate or latex), there is a potential for severe exacerbation or fatality upon reexposure.
Although many individuals with occupational asthma improve after removal from exposure to either low-molecular-weight or high-molecularweight sensitizers, more than half fail to recover completely, even after 2 or more years since the last exposure. Those who are sensitized to occupational agents ideally should discontinue further exposure. Both the individual and his or her physician need to monitor the course of asthmatic symptoms, especially if ongoing exposure occurs. Many can be identified as having a particular type of asthma. For those who have allergic asthma, exercise-induced and irritant-induced components may be identified as well.

Irritant-induced asthma, known as reactive airways dysfunction syndrome (RADS), may result from a single high-level exposure to a highly irritating gas, fume, mist, or vapor. The diagnosis of RADS requires (1) inhalation exposure to an acutely irritating concentration of a substance, (2) onset of symptoms (cough, wheezing cough, or dyspnea) within 24 hours after exposure with persistent respiratory symptoms, and (3) functional abnormalities (airway hyperresponsiveness) for more than 3 months, with no preexisting respiratory disease.30

Irritant-induced asthma often improves with time; some people may resume their former employment. However, some individuals experience persistent respiratory impairment. Individual assessment is important because reducing the degree and duration of exposure may control symptoms in some people, but complete removal from exposure may be necessary to control symptoms in others.

Occupational and nonoccupational asthma impairment evaluations follow the same guidelines. Both require a thorough review of current occupational and home environments and the likelihood of similar exposures in subsequent workplaces. When assessing impairment due to asthma, information is needed from both clinical and physiologic parameters. The AMA recommends that the examiner follow ATS guidelines when assessing asthma impairment and include measurements of pulmonary mechanics, airway hyperresponsiveness, and medication requirements.1 Table 5-9 lists the criteria for impairment evaluation for asthma severity. The examiner evaluates the indices listed, including the minimum medication needed to control the individual’s asthma.

Before performing an impairment rating for asthma, the examiner needs to determine that the pattern of asthma is clinically stable and well treated, based upon fulfilling the objectives of treatment as detailed by the expert panel report of the National Asthma Education Program.18,31 The objectives of treatment are: (1) to achieve control or the best overall results (least symptoms, least need for ß-adrenergic agonists when taken only if required, best expiratory flow rates, least diurnal variation of flow rates, and least side effects from medication); (2) to use the minimum amount of medication to maintain control or the best overall results; and (3) to treat exacerbations early to prevent them from becoming severe.
-- chars 3725 --

In 1993, the ATS developed guidelines for the evaluation of impairment and/or disability in individuals with asthma.1 According to the ATS statement, asthma necessitated special guidelines because of its distinct features, including: (1) variable airflow obstruction and change in clinical status over time;
(2) partial or complete reversibility of airflow obstruction with therapy; (3) nonspecific airway hyperresponsiveness to irritants such as dusts, gases, fumes, or smoke; and (4) sensitization to occupational agents producing airway inflammation that with repeated exposure may become chronic and irreversible.

In assessing an individual with suspected asthma, if the prebronchodilator FEV1 is above the lower limit of normal, use methacholine challenge to assess airway responsiveness. The degree of airway hyperresponsiveness and scoring are illustrated in Table
--break--
5-9. If the prebronchodilator FEV1 is below the lower limit of normal, the degree of reversibility is assessed with inhaled bronchodilators (see Table 5-9 for scoring).

To perform the evaluation at a state of maximal medical improvement, choose the optimal drug treatment to minimize symptoms. The type and extent of necessary medication is one measure of impairment severity (see Table 5-9 for scoring). Use of medication, as a score for impairment, is only used in individuals who have a diagnosis of asthma.

The scores for postbronchodilator FEV1, reversibility of FEV1 (or PC20), and medication use are added to obtain a summary score for respiratory impairment (see Table 5-10). ATS criteria do not assign impairment percentages. If an impairment percentage is needed, refer to Table 5-10, which assigns impairment classes and percentages to an asthma score. The authors of this chapter have assigned these impairment percentages according to the ATS criteria, based on their clinical judgment. In determining the percent impairment for a particular class, the examiner needs to consider how the person’s asthma affects the ability to perform activities of daily living.

†When FEV1 is greater than the lower limit of normal, PC20 should be determined and used for rating of impairment; when FEV1 is less than 70% of the predicted, the degree of reversibility should be used; and when FEV1 is between 70% of the predicted and the lower limit of normal, either reversibility or PC20 can be used. The score for minimum medication use is added to the appropriate measurement criteria outlined above.

‡Need for minimum medication should be demonstrated by the treating physician, for example, through previous records of exacerbation when medications have been reduced. Adapted from ATS guidelines.1

--break--
5.6 Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Individuals with obstructive sleep apnea experience intermittent, repetitive occlusions of the upper airway during sleep, when the pharyngeal muscles are relaxed. These occlusion periods produce airflow cessation at the nose and mouth that leads to progressive hypoxia, which then causes arousal from sleep. The affected person awakens briefly and reestablishes airway patency, resuming airflow with a loud snore or snorting sound. Because of recurrent awakenings during the night, there is disrupted sleep architecture, without restful sleep. Symptoms of sleep apnea include a history of loud snoring, unsatisfactory sleep pattern, daytime somnolence, cognitive dysfunction, and hypertension. Between 60% and 90% are obese and may have a large neck circumference. When the disorder is severe, erythrocytosis, pulmonary hypertension, and cor pulmonale may result.
-- chars 3591 --

Even if total occlusion of the upper airway does not occur during sleep, partial obstruction can lead to significant reduction in airflow and produce obstructive hypopnea, which causes oxyhemoglobin saturation reduction and similar clinical and physiologic abnormalities as seen in obstructive sleep apnea.

A variant of obstructive sleep apnea is the obesity hypoventilation syndrome. The weight of the chest wall in morbidly obese individuals may limit respiratory movements during sleep and wakefulness. As a result, both hypoxia and hypercapnia persist throughout the day as well as during sleep. The same physiologic consequences occur in these individuals as in those with obstructive sleep apnea. In fact, obstructive sleep apnea and obesity hypoventilation syndrome may coexist in the same person.

People affected by obstructive sleep apnea are at significantly increased risk of being involved in motor vehicle collisions. Severe daytime somnolence may prevent them from functioning adequately. Subtle changes in neuropsychological function include memory abnormalities and worsened motor coordination and mood that may affect the person’s daily life.

A diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea is confirmed by nocturnal polysomnography in an accredited sleep laboratory. Once the diagnosis has been established, prescribe continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) through a nasal device for use during sleep to maintain upper airway patency. Weight loss is the most effective means of long-term management and a possible cure for obstructive sleep apnea if a lower body mass index can be maintained.32

Grading obstructive sleep apnea severity depends on the number of apnea/hypopnea episodes observed in polysomnography and the severity of hypoxia caused by these episodes. There are no standard, welldocumented criteria for determining the level of impairment based on the results of polysomnography. For purposes of impairment rating as discussed in this chapter, refer to the judgment of a sleep specialist.

--break--
5.7 Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis

Hypersensitivity pneumonitis, also known as extrinsic allergic alveolitis, is a granulomatous interstitial and bronchiolar lung disease caused by immune sensitization to organic dusts and some low-molecularweight chemical antigens. A wide variety of antigenic substances are known to cause this disease. The acute disease is characterized by the onset of respiratory and constitutional symptoms beginning
--break--
4 to 8 hours after exposure to the offending material. Symptoms include chest tightness, cough, dyspnea, fever, chills, malaise, and myalgias. Pulmonary function tests in the acute phase of the disease show volume restriction and decreased diffusing capacity.
Hypoxia may be demonstrated by pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas testing. Chest radiographs may be normal but often show diffuse micronodular changes in the pulmonary parenchyma. When the person is removed from exposure, the symptoms, physiologic changes, and chest radiographic abnormalities begin to resolve within 1 to 2 days, although they may take 4 to 6 weeks for complete resolution.
-- chars 3136 --

In the subacute and chronic presentations of hypersensitivity pneumonitis, the predominant symptoms include exertional dyspnea and cough; some report sputum production, anorexia, fatigue, and weight loss. Pulmonary function studies often show mixed restriction and obstruction with isolated obstructive changes in some individuals. With repeated exposures, pulmonary fibrotic changes may occur as the abnormalities become chronic and irreversible.33

Permanently restrict individuals with hypersensitivity pneumonitis from exposure to the sensitizing agent. If pulmonary fibrosis has not supervened, normal pulmonary function may be reestablished.
However, the onset of pulmonary fibrosis is likely to produce respiratory impairment and may limit other types of employment. Once the acute episode has resolved and the condition is stable, the examiner may rate the degree of permanent impairment according to the criteria given in Table 5-12.

Asthma, pneumoconiosis, and hypersensitivity pneumonitis may require that the person refrain from working in a specific occupational setting where he or she is exposed to the offending agent. If reassigned where no ongoing exposure occurs, the individual may not have a permanent respiratory impairment.

--break--
5.9 Lung Cancer
All persons with lung cancer are severely impaired at diagnosis. At reevaluation 1 year after the diagnosis is established, if the person is found to be free of all evidence of tumor recurrence, then he or she is evaluated according to criteria listed in Table 5-12. If there is still evidence of tumor, the he or she is considered to be severely impaired (class 4 impairment); if the tumor recurs, the person will also be considered to be severely impaired (class 4 impairment).
Table 5-11 (the Karnofsky scale), specifically developed to describe the capabilities of individuals with cancer, may be used to further describe the capabilities of a person with lung cancer and enable categorization within a particular class.

--break--
5.8 Pneumoconiosis
Pneumoconiosis is a term used to describe diseases resulting from the inhalation of mineral dusts such as silica, coal, and asbestos, and metals such as cobalt and beryllium. The radiologic and pathologic patterns of pneumoconiosis from these dusts are usually quite distinct and beyond the scope of this chapter.
Latency between exposure to these dusts and development of disease varies, but disease can occur anywhere from 10 up to 30 years after initial exposure.34

The severity of impairment related to pneumoconiosis depends on the characteristics of the specific dust inhaled, the dust burden retained in the lungs, the susceptibility of the individual, and the length of time since first exposure. Under some circumstances, the parenchymal changes on chest radiograph may be progressive even after removal from exposure and may or may not be associated with physiologic impairment. Persons who develop pneumoconiosis should limit further exposure to the offending agent, particularly if radiographic changes have occurred at a relatively young age or if there is associated physiologic impairment. However, these individuals may be capable of working at other jobs where the offending dust is not present. See Table 5-12 for criteria for assessment of impairment due to pneumoconiosis.
-- chars 3325 --

Adapted from Moossa et al.35

--break--
5.10 Permanent
Impairment Due to Respiratory Disorders
Table 5-12 lists criteria for estimating the permanent impairment rating due to respiratory disorders, using pulmonary function and exercise test results.
Perform spirometry and DCO on each person being evaluated.3 V?O2max may provide additional information in selected individuals when indicated.
Determine the predicted values for FVC, FEV1, and DCO using Tables 5-2a through 5-7a, and calculate the percent predicted (observed/predicted value).
Determine the lower limit of normal for FVC, FEV1, and DCO using Tables 5-2b through 5-7b. The person must meet all of the listed criteria except for V?O2max in order to be considered nonimpaired. At least one of the listed criteria must be fulfilled to place an individual in any class with an impairment rating. As discussed in Chapter 1, in individuals where the preinjury or preillness values differ from the population-listed values, the examiner may depart from the

population-listed normal values for determining an impairment rating, using the preinjury and preillness “normal” value, and explain the reason for the departure.

The classification system in Table 5-12 considers only pulmonary function measurements for an impairment rating. It is recognized that pulmonary impairment can occur that does not significantly impact pulmonary function and exercise test results but that does impact the ability to perform activities of daily living, such as with bronchiectasis.

In these limited cases, the physician may assign an impairment rating based on the extent and severity of pulmonary dysfunction and the inability to perform activities of daily living (see Table 1-2). Measured losses of pulmonary function, and corresponding impairment classes, result in a loss in the ability to perform some activities of daily living. The physician can use these associations as a reference. A detailed description with supporting, objective documentation of the type of pulmonary impairment and its impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living is required.

†Refer to Crapo RO, Morris AH, Gardner RM for the lower limit of normal for FEV1 / FVC.2

--break--
5.11 Respiratory Impairment Evaluation

Summary
See Table 5–13 for an evaluation summary for the assessment of permanent impairment due to repiratory disorders.

================================================================================
Chapter 6:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Digestive System
6.1 Principles of Assessment
6.2 Upper Digestive Tract
6.3 Colon, Rectum, and Anus
6.4 Enterocutaneous Fistulas
6.5 Liver and Biliary Tract
6.6 Hernias
6.7 Digestive System Impairment Evaluation Summary
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction

This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairment of the digestive system, consisting of the alimentary canal, liver, biliary tract, and pancreas. The criteria for assigning permanent impairment ratings of digestive system disease include clinically established or objectively determined deviations from normal in the transport and assimilation of ingested food, nutrition metabolism, waste product excretion, and the effect of these problems on individuals’ performance of activities of daily living.
-- chars 3333 --
The following sections have been revised from the fourth edition: (1) impairment from ulcer disease has been revised since most duodenal and gastric ulcer disease cases can be eradicated with treatment of
H. pylori infection, and bleeding ulcer treatment has improved with injection or heat therapy, in some cases avoiding gastric resection; (2) orthotopic liver transplantation has reclaimed the lives of many endstage liver disease patients and significantly reduced the degree of permanent impairment; (3) parenteral nutrition and, in particular, home nutrition programs have completely rehabilitated some and improved the daily lives of many individuals with intestinal failure from a variety of causes; (4) new techniques for improving biliary drainage prevent or delay irreversible liver damage; (5) continued experience with intestinal anastomosis and stomas provides a greater sense of security and self-esteem, improves overall function, and reduces the degree of permanent impairment in some people. Impairments of similar gravity, which have similar impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living for the small and large intestine, have been given the same impairment ratings for comparable classes.

--break--
6.1 Principles of Assessment

Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

--break--
6.1a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Some impairment classes refer to symptoms that limit the ability to perform daily activities. When this information is subjective and possible to misinterpret, it should not serve as the sole criterion for assigning impairment ratings. Rather, the examiner should obtain objective data about the limitation’s extent and integrate those findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent impairment.

Esophageal impairment signs and symptoms include dysphagia, pyrosis or heartburn, retrosternal pain, regurgitation, bleeding, and weight loss. Note that occasional, minor dyspepsia, gas, and belching are within the experience of all individuals.

Stomach and duodenum impairment symptoms and signs include nausea, vomiting, pain, bleeding, obstruction, diarrhea, weight loss, and certain types of malabsorption. Some impairments may produce nutritional deficiencies that lead to hematologic and neurologic manifestations, which would be rated separately and combined with digestive system impairments.

Small intestine impairment symptoms and signs include abdominal pain, diarrhea, steatorrhea, bleeding, obstruction, and weight loss, which often are associated with general debility and other extraintestinal manifestations.

Pancreatic function impairment symptoms and signs include, but are not limited to, pain, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, steatorrhea, weight loss, muscle wasting, jaundice, diabetes mellitus, and debility. Impairment due to endocrine disturbance related to the pancreas is considered in the Guides chapter on the endocrine system (Chapter 10).
-- chars 3266 --

Colon, rectum, and anus impairment symptoms and signs include abdominal, pelvic, or perineal pain; disordered bowel action; tenesmus; fecal incontinence; bleeding; suppuration; and the appearance of hemorrhoids, fissures, and fistulas. Systemic manifestations may include fever, weight loss, debility, and anemia.

Hepatobiliary impairment symptoms and signs include pain, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, loss of strength and stamina, reduced resistance to infection, altered immune response, jaundice, and pruritus.
Advanced liver disease complications include edema and generalized ascites, portal hypertension leading to esophageal varices and hemorrhage, and metabolic disturbances leading to hepatic encephalopathy and renal failure.

Abdominal wall impairment symptoms and signs include typically intermittent discomfort or pain at or near the herniation site, often associated with postural changes or increased abdominal pressure; visible or palpable protrusion or swelling at the herniation site, often appearing and disappearing with abdominal pressure; and more acute and intense pain due to complications, especially incarceration and strangulation of contained bowel or omentum.

Incisional hernias may be unsightly and annoying; other symptoms, if any, tend to be related to the incisional hernia size. Inguinal and femoral hernias typically are painful and entail a greater risk of incarceration or strangulation. Most abdominal wall hernias are amenable to surgical correction.
--break--
6.1b Description of Clinical Studies Objective procedures useful in establishing esophageal impairment include, but are not limited to: (1) imaging procedures, such as fluoroscopy and radiography employing contrast media, and computed tomography (CT); (2) peroral endoscopy, including cytologic study or biopsy; and (3) functional tests, such as manometry or intraesophageal pH measurement.

Objective procedures useful in establishing stomach and duodenum impairment include, but are not limited to: (1) imaging techniques, such as fluoroscopy and roentgenography with contrast media, scintigraphy, and CT; (2) peroral endoscopy, with biopsy and cytologic study; (3) gastric secretory tests; (4) malabsorption tests; (5) stool examination; and (6) urea breath test for H. pylori.

Objective procedures useful in establishing impairment of the small intestine include, but are not limited to: (1) fluoroscopy and roentgenography employing contrast media; (2) peroral endoscopy and mucosal biopsy; and (3) intestinal malabsorption testing measures such as fecal fat content and urinary d-xylose excretion tests, carbon 14 breath test, and Schilling test.

Objective procedures useful in establishing impairment of pancreatic function include, but are not limited to: (1) ultrasonography; (2) radiography, including plain or scout films of the abdomen, CT, and endoscopic pancreatography; (3) guided, fineneedle aspiration; (4) determination of plasma glucose level and glucose tolerance; (5) assay of pancreatic enzyme activity in blood, urine, and feces;
-- chars 3056 --
(6) sweat electrolyte test; and (7) procedures such as the secretin test.

Objective procedures useful in establishing colon, rectum, and anus impairment include, but are not limited to: (1) digital and endoscopic examination, including anoscopy, proctoscopy, sigmoidoscopy, and colonoscopy; (2) biopsy; (3) fecal microscopy and culture; and (4) fluoroscopy and roentgenography employing contrast media.

Objective procedures useful in establishing hepatobiliary impairment include, but are not limited to: (1) ultrasonography; (2) contrast radiography, such as percutaneous and endoscopic cholangiography; (3) CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); (4) nucleide scintigraphy; (5) angiography; (6) liver biopsy and
fine-needle aspiration; and (7) laboratory tests to assess the bile ducts and various liver functions.

Objective procedures useful in establishing impairment by hernias include, but are not limited to:
(1) abdominal wall physical examination and
(2) imaging by roentgenography or CT scan with or without contrast media.
--break--
6.1 c Desirable Weight
Weight loss is an essential criterion for evaluating the severity and consequences of gastrointestinal disorders. To determine impairment resulting from digestive disorders, desirable weight may be defined as follows:

--break--
1. If possible, the examiner should determine by history or from previous medical records a weight that predates the individual’s digestive disorder that is considered usual and customary. The examiner should use that weight as the desirable weight from which any deviation is measured.

--break--
2. If the examiner is not able to determine by history or previous medical records a usual and customary weight that predates the disorder, then the examiner should refer to a table of desirable weights and calculate deviations from the lower end of the table’s range that corresponds to the individual’s gender, height, and body build.
Tables 6-1 and 6-2 present desirable weights according to height for men and women, respectively. For an obese person, the usual preimpairment weight may not be as physiologically desirable as the current weight. Thus, the examiner should use his
or her clinical judgment when assessing the relative importance of weight loss.
--break--
6.1 d Impairment Determination
Impairment classes, as listed in Tables 6-3 through 6-9, are organand system-specific. The impairment classes and percentage ratings reflect anatomic, physiological, and functional abnormalities at the organ and system level and the ability to perform activities of daily living (see Table 1-2). A gastrointestinal system impairment evaluation falling within
normal range reflects an individual who performs all activities of daily living with only normal, occasional gastrointestinal symptoms; no limitation of activities; no special diet; and no required medication, with adequate reserve capacity that allows the body to obtain the required nutrition and maintain normal weight.

For the purposes of impairment ratings, the upper digestive tract has been defined to include the esophagus, stomach and duodenum, small intestine, and pancreas. Impairment criteria and classes have been combined for the colon and rectum; anal; liver and biliary impairments; and hernia impairments.
-- chars 3286 --

--break--
6.2 Upper Digestive Tract (Esophagus, Stomach and Duodenum, Small Intestine, and Pancreas)
--break--
6.2 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Upper Digestive Tract Disease
Criteria for evaluating impairments related to upper digestive tract disease are given in Table 6-3.

Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The original hiatal hernia and motility disorder have neither interfered with normal nutrition nor impaired ability to perform usual daily activities.1

--break--
12
injections, increasing impairment to 10% or more.

--break--
6.3 Colon, Rectum, and Anus
--break--
6.3
a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Colonic or Rectal Disease
Criteria for evaluating impairments in function of the colon and rectum are listed in Table 6-4.

--break--
6.3b Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Anal Disease
Criteria for evaluating permanent impairments of the anus are listed in Table 6-5.

--break--
6.4 Enterocutaneous Fistulas
Evaluate permanent enterocutaneous fistulas of the gastrointestinal tract, biliary tract, or pancreas that are associated with diseases of these structures or their treatment as part of the primarily involved organ system. Permanent, surgically created stomas usually are provided to compensate for anatomic losses and to allow either ingress to or egress from the alimentary tract.

If an individual has a permanent, surgically created stoma, combine a percentage based on Table 6-6 with an estimate based on criteria related to the involved organ (see the Combined Values Chart,
p. 604).

Many people with well-functioning, long-standing stomas such as Brooke ileostomy or descending colostomy lead full and active lives with few limitations in overall performance of daily activities.

--break--
6.5 Liver and Biliary Tract
--break--
6.5a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Liver or Biliary Tract Disease
Criteria for evaluating permanent impairment of the liver and biliary tract are listed in Tables 6-7 and 6-8.

--break--
6.6  Hernias
--break--
6.6a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Herniation
Criteria for evaluating impairment due to herniation are listed in Table 6-9.

Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Uncomplicated incisional hernia.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Asymptomatic incisional hernia only mildly annoying. No significant risk of complication. No limit in ability to perform activities of daily living.

--break--
6.7 Digestive System Impairment Evaluation Summary
See Table 6-10 for an evaluation summary for the assessment of permanent impairment due to digestive system disorders.

Assessment of

================================================================================
Chapter 7:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Urinary and Reproductive Systems
7.1 Principles of Assessment
7.2 The Urinary System
7.3 Upper Urinary Tract
7.4 Urinary Diversion
7.5 Bladder
7.6 Urethra
-- chars 3005 --
7.7 Male Reproductive Organs
7.8 Female Reproductive Organs
7.9 Urinary and Reproductive Systems Impairment Evaluation Summary
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairments of the urinary and male and female reproductive systems as they affect the body’s overall function and an individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living.

The following sections have been revised for the fifth edition: (1) the criteria for upper and lower urinary tract impairment have been revised; (2) impairment classes for bladder and urethral dysfunction have been revised to reflect an increased understanding of bladder impairment and to incorporate results from urodynamic studies; (3) the reproductive system sections have been updated to reflect more common cases and approaches; and (4) updated and detailed references are listed for the disorders discussed.
--break--
7.1 Principles of Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

The purpose of urinary and reproductive system impairment assessment is to determine whether a permanent impairment in these systems exists, to assess the severity and document the impact of the impairment on the ability to perform activities of daily living, and to prevent further impairment.

Pathologic abnormalities in other systems (eg, the hematologic, endocrine, or neurologic systems) may produce urinary or reproductive system impairment. These abnormalities are combined with urinary or reproductive system impairments to produce a whole person impairment rating. For example, an intracranial brain lesion above the pons will produce some degree of bladder hyperreflexia and an urgent need to urinate. However, an intracranial brain lesion below the pons in the spinal cord will result not only in a hyperreflexic bladder but also in detrusorsphincter dyssynergia that may result in difficulty urinating, and high intravesical pressures that could lead to vesicoureteral reflux and hydronephrosis.
Urinary tract dysfunction is also seen with lumbosacral injury below the T10 vertebra level and would be combined with musculoskeletal dysfunction to determine whole person impairment.

To determine the individual’s placement within a particular class range, assess the disease’s severity and impact on the ability to perform the activities of daily living as listed in Table 1-2. Impairment ratings are greater for urinary tract or reproductive impairments, which have more of an effect on the ability to perform activities of daily living.

--break--
7.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Some impairment classes refer to limitations in the ability to perform daily activities because of symptoms. When this information is subjective and possibly misinterpreted, it should not serve as the sole criterion upon which decisions about impairment are made.
-- chars 3184 --
Rather, obtain objective data about the limitation’s

extent and integrate the findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent impairment.

--break--
7.2  The Urinary System
The urinary system consists of the upper urinary tract (the kidneys and ureters), the bladder, and the urethra. The parenchyma of the kidneys produces urine, which is conducted by the renal calices, pelves,
and ureters to the bladder and then the urethra.

The kidneys are an important homeostatic regulatory organ. The degree to which kidney and conduit abnormalities may affect the whole person ranges from a clinically undetectable change to marked specific and generalized manifestations of deterioration of the nephron reserves, loss of kidney function, and urine transport abnormalities.

The bladder is a voluntarily controllable urine reservoir that normally permits several hours of urine retention. Bladder dysfunction may be due to pathologic conditions within or outside the urinary system. Within the urinary system, bladder tumors, stones, and inflammatory lesions may produce urinary system impairment.

In women, the urethra is a urinary conduit containing a voluntary sphincter. In men, the urethra possesses a voluntary sphincter and propulsive muscles and is a conduit for urine and seminal ejaculations.

Permanent, surgically created urinary diversions are usually performed to compensate for anatomic losses and to allow for urine outflow. Diversions are evaluated as a part of, and in conjunction with, the assessment of the involved portion of the urinary tract.
When evaluating permanent impairment of any segment of the urinary system, impairments of all components of the upper and lower tract must be evaluated and combined to determine renal system impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

--break--
7.2 a Interpretation of Urinary Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of upper urinary tract function impairment may include changes in urination; edema; decreased physical stamina; appetite and weight loss; anemia; uremia; loin, abdominal, or costovertebral angle pain; hematuria; chills and fever; hypertension and its complications; abnormalities in the appearance of the urine or its

sediment; and biochemical blood changes. Renal disease, especially in early stages, may be made evident only by laboratory findings.

Signs and symptoms of bladder function impairment may include urinary frequency, dysuria, urinary incontinence, urine retention, hematuria, pyuria, passage of urinary calculi, and a suprapubic mass.

Signs and symptoms of urethra function impairment include dysuria, diminished urinary stream, urinary retention, incontinence, extraneous or ectopic urinary openings, periurethral masses, and diminished urethral caliber.

--break--
7.2 b Description of Clinical Studies
Two clinically useful renal function determinations, serum creatinine and the renal clearance of endogenous creatinine, may serve as criteria for evaluating upper urinary tract function. The serum creatinine level reflects overall renal function. Under normal hydration conditions, the serum creatinine level should be less than 133 µmol/L (1.5 mg/dL).
-- chars 3183 --

The glomerular filtration rate, which measures renal clearance of endogenous creatinine, gives a quantitative estimate of the total functioning nephron population. Because longer periods of urine collection improve the reliability of renal function clearance tests, use 24-hour endogenous creatinine clearance measurements. The normal creatinine clearance ranges are 130 to 200 L/24 h (90 to 139 mL/min) for men and 115 to
--break--
180 L/24 h (80 to 125 mL/min) for women.

If there are discrepancies in these two test results or additional information is needed, tests—such as metabolic studies, tests of the concentration levels of electrolytes and other chemicals in serum and urine, urine osmolalities, urinalyses, urine cultures, radiologic investigations, isotope renograms, and renal computed tomographic (CT) scans—may be necessary to determine impairment.

Parenchymal disfiguration and conduit abnormality assessment may require diagnostic procedures such as endoscopy, study of one or both kidneys, biopsy, arteriography, radiography of the urinary tract, CAT scan, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

Objective techniques useful in evaluating bladder function include (but are not limited to) cystoscopy, cystography, voiding cystourethrography, cystometry, uroflometry, urinalysis, and urine cultures.

Objective techniques useful in evaluating urethral function include (but are not limited to) urethroscopy, urethrography, cystourethrography, endoscopy, and cystometrography.

--break--
7.3  Upper Urinary Tract

--break--
7.3 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Upper Urinary Tract Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating upper urinary tract disease are given in Table 7-1. The creatinine clearance, the most accurate reflection of renal function, is an important criterion in each class because it quantifies the degree of upper urinary tract functional impairment.

From a physiologic point of view, the individual with only one functioning kidney may have normal overall renal function because of the efficiency of the remaining kidney. However, with only one kidney, a normal safety factor is lost. Consider the individual with only one functioning kidney as having a 10% whole person impairment because of such an essential organ loss. Combine this percentage with the estimate for any other permanent impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

Renal function deterioration that requires either peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis indicates severe impairment in the 60% to 95% range, or a class 4 impairment (Table 7-1). Successful renal transplantation may result in marked renal function improvement; the impairment is now in the 15% to 34% range, or a class 2 impairment. However,
transplant recipients require continuous observation and medication, which may add to their impairment. For this reason, depending upon the impairment’s effect on the activities of daily living (see Table 1-2), one may add 0% to 5% to the final renal function impairment estimate, as discussed in Chapter 1.1
-- chars 3049 --

Also, evaluate impairment that is related to complications of the disease or therapy, such as cushingoid changes and osteoporosis, as they arise, and combine the appropriate percentages with the final renal impairment estimate (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Full recovery with no permanent impairment.

--break--
7.4  Urinary Diversion

--break--
7.4 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Urinary Diversion Disorders
The impairment criteria for evaluating urinary diversion disorders are given in Table 7-2.

--break--
7.7 Male Reproductive Organs
The male reproductive organs include the penis, scrotum, testicles, epididymides, spermatic cords, prostate, and seminal vesicles. See the following sections for impairment percentages for male reproductive organs for 40to 65-year-old men. Increase the percentages by 50% for men younger than 40, and decrease the percentages by 50% for men older than
--break--
65. For instance, class 3 impairment in a 35-year-old man would be rated at 30% (20% + 0.5[20%]). New treatments, when successful, may decrease the degree of impairment.

--break--
7.7 a Penis
The penis has the sexual functions of erection and ejaculation. The penis’s urinary function is discussed in the first part of this chapter on the urethra (Section 7.6). Penile functional impairment symptoms and signs include erection and sensation abnormalities and partial or complete loss of the penis.

When evaluating penis impairment, consider both sexual and urinary function impairment. Determine sexual function impairment according to the following classifications. To determine impairment of the whole person, combine this estimate with the appropriate percentage for estimated urinary function impairment. This classification also may be used to estimate penile implant use impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

Objective techniques useful in evaluating penis function include (but are not limited to) penile tumescence studies, Doppler ultrasound penile blood flow evaluations, dynamic cavernosometry and cavernosography, and angiography.10-14

--break--
7.7b Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Penile Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating penile disease are given in Table 7-5.

--break--
7.7c Scrotum
The scrotum covers, protects, and provides a suitable environment for the testicles. Scrotum function impairment symptoms and signs include pain, enlargement, testicular immobility, inappropriate testicle location, and masses. Objective techniques useful in evaluating scrotum function include, but are not limited to, observation, palpation, testicular examination, and scrotal ultrasound.

--break--
7.7d Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Scrotal Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating scrotal disease are given in Table 7-6.

--break--
7.7e Testicles, Epididymides, and Spermatic Cords
The testicles produce spermatozoa and synthesize male steroid hormones. The epididymides and spermatic cords transport the spermatozoa.
-- chars 3090 --

Testicular, epididymal, and spermatic cord impairment signs and symptoms include local or referred pain; tenderness and change in size, contour, position, and texture; and testicular hormones and seminal fluid abnormalities.

Objective techniques useful in evaluating testicular, epididymal, and spermatic cord function include (but are not limited to) vasography; ultrasound; lymphangiography; spermatic arteriography and venography; biopsy; semen analysis; and follicle-stimulating, ketosteroid, and hydroxysteroid hormone studies.

--break--
7.7f Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Testicular, Epididymal, and Spermatic Cord Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating testicular, epididymal, and spermatic cord disease are given in Table 7-7.

The impairment criteria for evaluating prostate and seminal vesicle disease are given in Table 7-8.

--break--
7.8 Female Reproductive Organs
The female reproductive organs include the vulva, vagina, cervix, uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries. Female reproductive system impairment is influenced by age, especially if the woman is of childbearing age. Consider the physiologic differences between premenopausal and postmenopausal women when evaluating and estimating female reproductive organ impairment.15

--break--
7.8a Vulva and Vagina
The vulva has cutaneous, sexual, and urinary functions. Urinary function is discussed in the first part of this chapter on the urethra (Section 7.6). The vagina has a sexual function and also serves as a birth pas-

sageway. The clitoris is an erectile organ that has an important role in sexual functioning.

Vulval and vaginal function impairment symptoms and signs include sensation alteration or loss; lubrication loss; partial or complete absence; vulvovaginitis; vulvitis; vaginitis; cicatrization; ulceration; stenosis; atrophy or hypertrophy; neoplasia or dysplasia; difficulties with sexual intercourse, urination, or vaginal delivery; and underlying perineal structure support defect.

--break--
7.8b Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Vulval and Vaginal Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating vulval and vaginal disease are given in Table 7-9.

--break--
7.8c Cervix and Uterus
The cervix serves as a passageway for spermatozoa and menstrual blood, maintains closure of the uterus during pregnancy, and serves as a portion of the birth canal during vaginal delivery. Hormones, elaborated by the ovaries or administered exogenously, influence the uterus. The uterus serves as the organ of menstruation, a means of spermatozoa transportation, and the container of fertilization products. The uterus supplies the power for the first and third stages of labor and, in part, for the second stage.

Cervical and uterine functional impairment symptoms and signs include abnormalities of menstruation, fertility, pregnancy, or labor; excessive cervical canal size, stenosis, or atresia; cervical incompetence during pregnancy; noncyclic hemorrhage; uterine displacement; dysplasia; and neoplasia.
-- chars 3028 --

Objective techniques useful in evaluating cervical and uterine function include (but are not limited to) cervical mucous studies; vaginal, cervical, and intrauterine cytologic smears; biopsy; ultrasound; radiologic studies using radiopaque contrast media; blood and urine hormone studies; basal body temperature recordings; sperm concentration, mobility, and viability studies; uterus dilation and curettage; endometrium microscopic study; gynecography; laparoscopy; computed tomography; magnetic resonance imaging; hysteroscopy; ultrasound placental localization techniques; and saline solution sonohysterography.

--break--
7.8d Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Cervical and Uterine Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating cervical and uterine disease are given in Table 7-10.

Evaluate any associated endocrine impairment in accordance with the criteria set forth in the Guides Chapter 10, The Endocrine System.

The impairment criteria for evaluating fallopian tube and ovarian disease are given in Table 7-11.

================================================================================
Chapter 8:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
8.1 Principles of Assessment
8.2 Disfigurement
8.3 Scars and Skin Grafts
8.4 Contact Dermatitis
8.5 Natural Rubber Latex Allergy
8.6 Skin Cancer
8.7 Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Skin Disorders
8.8 Skin Impairment Evaluation Summary
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairment of the skin and its appendages and estimating the extent to which skin impairments affect the ability to perform activities of daily living (see Table 1-2). Permanent impairment of the skin is any dermatologic abnormality or loss that persists after medical treatment and rehabilitation and that is unlikely to change significantly in the next year, with or without medical treatment.

Table 8-1 summarizes skin components, functions, and disorders. Skin functions include: (1) providing a protective covering; (2) participating in sensory perception, temperature regulation, fluid regulation, electrolyte balance, immunobiologic defenses, and trauma resistance; and (3) regenerating the epidermis and its appendages.

Protective skin functions include barrier defenses against chemical irritant and allergic sensitizer damage, microorganism invasion, and ultraviolet light injuries. Temperature regulation involves proper sweat gland and small blood vessel functioning. The barrier defense against fluid loss is related to the intactness of the stratum corneum.

Revisions from the fourth edition include: (1) new sections on contact dermatitis and natural rubber latex allergy; (2) a new section on cancer; and (3) updated clinical information and references.

--break--
8.1 Principles of Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.
-- chars 3215 --

Skin disorders may develop from exposure to physical, mechanical, biological, and chemical agents.
Identification and avoidance of these agents may prevent ongoing skin disorder aggravation. Physicians need to determine the clinical course and permanence

of skin disorders associated with possible intermittent exposures.

Clinical evaluation requires sound clinical judgment based on a detailed medical history, thorough physical examination, and judicious use of diagnostic procedures. Ancillary diagnostic and laboratory procedures include patch, open, prick, intracutaneous, and serologic allergy tests; Wood’s light examinations, cultures, and scrapings for bacteria, fungi, and viruses; and biopsies.

To determine the appropriate impairment class (Table 8-2) for an affected individual, evaluate the severity of the skin condition and the impact of the skin condition on the ability to perform activities of daily living (see Table 1-2). Determine the appropriate percentage within any impairment class by considering the frequency, intensity, and complexity of the medical condition and the treatment regimen. In general, the more frequent and intense the symptoms, signs, and medical treatment, the higher the estimated impairment rating within any impairment class. Table 8-2 lists the impairment classes and percents of whole person impairment for all dermatologic disorders. A brief overview of those disorders follows.

Impairments of other body systems, such as behavioral problems, restriction of motion or ankylosis of joints, and respiratory, cardiovascular, endocrine, or gastrointestinal tract disorders, may be associated

with skin impairments. When there is a permanent impairment of more than one body system, evaluate the extent of whole person impairment related to each system and combine the estimated impairment percentages (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine total impairment.

--break--
8.1a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
In some cases, limitations in the ability to perform daily activities are based on symptoms. This information may be subjective and possibly misinterpreted, and it should not serve as the sole criterion for impairment rating decisions. Rather, obtain objective data about the extent of the limitation and integrate findings with subjective data to estimate the permanent impairment rating.

--break--
8.1a.1 Pruritus
Pruritus is a common symptom of dermatologic conditions. Pruritus is a subjective, unpleasant sensation and symptom that provokes the desire to scratch and rub the skin. The itching sensation may be intolerable. Pruritus is closely related to pain and is mediated by pain receptors and fibers when they are weakly stimulated. Like pain, pruritus may be defined as a unique complex of afferent stimuli that interacts with the individual’s emotional or affective state of mind.

The pruritus sensation has two elements that are extremely variable in makeup and time. Peripheral neural stimulation varies from the absence of sensation to awareness that stimuli are producing a usual or unusual sensation. Central nervous system reaction is modified by state of attentiveness, experience, motivation at the moment, and such stimuli as exercise, sweat, and temperature change.
-- chars 3267 --

When evaluating pruritus associated with skin disorders, consider (1) how the pruritus interferes with performance of the activities of daily living, and (2) to what extent the pruritus description is supported by such objective skin signs as lichenification, excoriation, or hyperpigmentation. Subjective itching complaints that cannot be substantiated objectively may require referral or consultation.

--break--
8.1b Description of Procedures
Common clinical investigations for dermatologic conditions include skin testing, biopsy, and relevant laboratory studies.
--break--
8.1
b.1 Patch Testing, Performance, Interpretation, and Relevance
The sine qua non for the diagnosis of allergic contact dermatitis is a properly performed and interpreted patch test. The information from patch testing complements an appropriate, detailed history. Patch testing may significantly contribute to the diagnosis and management of contact dermatitis.

Be aware that patch testing may yield false-positive and false-negative results. Selecting the proper concentration of the suspected allergen, vehicle, site of application, and type of patch is critical for procedure validity. Making such selections and determining test result relevance require considerable skill and experience.

Interpret a positive or negative patch test result in conjunction with the clinical history and a detailed knowledge of testing procedures. Although appropriate test concentrations and vehicles have been established for many sensitizers, there are no established vehicle and concentration standards for the vast number of chemicals in use.

Patch test results require careful interpretation to discern allergic from irritant responses, as well as to appropriately interpret whether the result is relevant to the individual’s dermatitis and exposures. Patch tests are only used to detect contact allergy and are only one component in a complete evaluation.
Further details about patch testing, its values, and its limitations are discussed in standard texts, some of which are listed at the end of this chapter.

--break--
8.2  Disfigurement
Skin disfigurement is an altered or abnormal appearance that may be an alteration of color, shape, or structure, or a combination of these.
Disfigurement may be a residual of injury or disease, or it may accompany a recurrent or ongoing disorder. Examples of disfigurement include giant pigmented nevi, nevus flammeus, cavernous hemangioma, and pigmentation alteration.

Disfigurement usually has no effect on body function and may have little or no effect on the ability to perform activities of daily living, except if the disfigurement causes social rejection or an unfavorable
self-image with self-imposed isolation, lifestyle alteration, or other behavioral changes. If impairment in the ability to perform activities of daily living due

to disfigurement does exist, it is usually manifested by a behavior change, such as withdrawal from social contacts. Behavioral changes are evaluated in accordance with the criteria in the Guides Chapter 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders.
-- chars 3101 --

Evaluate impairments related to disfigurement or altered pigmentation in accordance with the criteria given in Table 8-2 and described later in this chapter. Enhance disfigurement descriptions with good color photographs that show multiple defect views.
Estimate the probable duration and permanency of the disfigurement. Describe in writing the possibility of improving the condition through medical or surgical therapy and the extent to which it can be concealed cosmetically, as with hairpieces, wigs, or cosmetics. Depict with photographs if possible.

Evaluate the effect on the performance of the activities of daily living if a scar involves the loss of sweat gland function, hair growth, nail growth, or pigment formation. Evaluate burns and scars according to the criteria in this chapter; give special consideration to the injury’s impact on the individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living. When impairment resulting from a burn or scar is based on peripheral nerve dysfunction or loss of range of motion, evaluate the skin impairment separately and combine the impairment rating with that from Chapters 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System; 16, The Upper Extremities; or 17, The Lower Extremities. If chest wall excursion is limited or if there are behavioral changes secondary to disfigurement, consult Chapter 5, The Respiratory System, or Chapter 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders.

--break--
8.3  Scars and Skin Grafts
Scars, cutaneous abnormalities that result from the healing of burned, traumatized, or diseased tissue, represent a special type of disfigurement. Give the scars’ dimensions in centimeters, and describe their shape, color, anatomic location, and any evidence of ulceration, depression, or elevation. Indicate whether the scar is “atrophic” or “hypertrophic”; soft and pliable or hard and indurated, thin or thick, and smooth or rough; and attachment, if any, to underlying bones, joints, muscles, or other tissue. Good color photographs with multiple views of the defect enhance the scars’ description.

Consider the tendency of a scar to disfigure when evaluating whether there is permanent impairment due to scarring. Also consider whether the scar can be changed, made less visible, or concealed.
Function may be restored without improving appearance, and appearance may be improved without altering function.

Skin grafts may be used to replace skin losses resulting from trauma or disease. Grafts commonly lack hair, lubrication, pliability, and sensation, and they may demonstrate altered pigmentation. These changes affect the function and appearance of the graft site. The altered lubrication, pliability, and sensation may result in diminished protection against microorganisms and diminished resistance to mechanical, chemical, and thermal trauma. The altered appearance may be significant if the area involves exposed parts, such as the dorsum of the hand, the face, or the neck.
--break--
8.4

tact Dermatitis
Contact dermatitis is an inflammatory skin reaction induced by exposure to an external agent and is the most frequent cause of occupational skin disease.
-- chars 3137 --
Contact dermatitis most often involves the hands, wrists, and forearms, although any area may be affected. Two types of contact dermatitis are generally recognized: irritant (80% of cases), which results from direct tissue damage, and allergic (20% of cases), in which tissue damage is mediated through type IV delayed cellular hypersensitivity.
Irritant and allergic contact dermatitis may coexist in the same person and are often difficult to differentiate on physical examination and histologically.

Irritants may be strong (absolute) or weak (marginal). Cumulative exposure to marginal irritants causes most cases of contact dermatitis and may impair the barrier function of the skin, allowing the penetration of potential allergens. Many cutaneous allergens, such as chromates, nickel salts, epoxy resins, and preservatives, are also primary irritants. Allergy can be induced or maintained by chemicals in concentrations insufficient to irritate nonallergic skin. Allergen cross-sensitivity is an important phenomenon in which an individual who is allergic to one chemical (eg, urushiol in poison ivy or poison oak) also will react to structurally related chemicals (eg, in Japanese lacquer, mango, and cashew nutshell oil).

Accurate diagnosis is the key to proper management of contact dermatitis. If the specific agent(s) can be identified (see section on patch testing) and successfully avoided, full recovery usually is anticipated; but if contact continues, the dermatitis may become chronic and disabling, and it may prevent the individual from performing some activities of daily living.

--break--
8.5 Natural Rubber Latex Allergy
Latex allergy generally refers to an IgE-mediated immediate hypersensitivity reaction to one or more protein allergens present in natural rubber latex (NRL) devices, especially gloves. Individuals with spina bifida and health care workers are at particular risk; NRL allergy has become a significant medical and occupational health problem. Clinical manifestations range from contact urticaria and angioedema to allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis, asthma, and anaphylaxis. Contact dermatitis to rubber accelerators and antioxidants added during manufacture has been associated with NRL allergy. A number of NRLallergic individuals are atopic, with asthma, other environmental type I allergies, and hand eczema.
Symptoms and signs of contact urticaria to NRL may be masked by preexisting hand eczema. Also evaluate individuals with NRL allergy for manifestions in other organ systems (eg, respiratory symptoms and asthma). See Chapter 5, The Respiratory System, for an example of NRL-induced asthma.

Allergen avoidance is the current treatment for NRL allergy. When aerosolized, glove powder (an NRLallergen carrier) can produce respiratory symptoms in susceptible individuals. Affected workers may have to avoid contact with NRL gloves and other NRL-containing products, avoid areas where they might inhale the powder from NRL gloves worn by other workers, and wear a medical alert bracelet.
-- chars 3041 --
--break--
8.6

n Cancer
Skin cancer is the most prevalent of all cancers. Three main types exist: basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and malignant melanoma.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common form of skin cancer. Predisposing factors include light skin color, inability to tan, sun exposure, blond or red hair, freckling in childhood, therapeutic radiation, and arsenic exposure. Several different clinical and histologic types exist; there is also a much less common, inherited condition called the basal cell nevus or Gorlin syndrome. BCC is usually locally invasive, with a small metastatic potential. The main goal of therapy is complete eradication of the tumor with the highest cure rate and the least amount of disfigurement.

Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) makes up about one fifth of nonmelanoma skin cancers. SCC is more common in individuals with light skin coloration and can arise from excess sun exposure, leading to precancerous actinic keratoses. Environmental risk factors include arsenic, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon, chronic infrared heat, and therapeutic radiation exposure. SCC may also occur in chronic scars from burns, trauma, and inflammatory processes.
Several clinical and histologic types exist, but SCC is more likely to metastasize, especially from sites involving the lip, dorsal hand, and temple, as well
as in larger, deeper, and more anaplastic lesions. Therapeutic options are the same as for basal cell carcinoma. Sun avoidance and close follow-up are essential in patients with SCC.

Cutaneous malignant melanoma is an increasingly common and lethal malignancy of melanocytes and nevus cells in certain precursor lesions. The increased frequency of melanoma is well documented; rates of incidence are rising more rapidly for this than for any other cancer. The salient challenge for clinicians is to detect and excise melanoma in its earliest stage, as tumor thickness remains the most important prognostic indicator of this malignancy.
Early diagnosis and surgical excision of in situ, or early invasive, melanomas are curative in most individuals. Despite advances in chemotherapy and immunotherapy, the efficacy of treatment of advanced melanoma remains limited, and the prognosis of metastatic disease remains guarded.

--break--
8.7 Criteria for Rating Permanent
Impairment Due to Skin Disorders
The impairment criteria for all dermatologic disorders are given in Table 8-2.

Current Symptoms: None.
Physical Exam: Hands and arms: no signs of dermatitis.
Clinical Studies: Patch test: strong allergic reaction to 0.1% petrolatum mixture of a nonmercurial preservative, 2-n-4-isothiazolin-3-one, used in company’s latex paints. Subsequent evaluation: normal.
Diagnosis: Resolved allergic contact dermatitis caused by preservative.

--break--
8.8 Skin Impairment Evalution Summary
See Table 8-3 for an evalution summary for the assessment of permanent impairment due to skin disorders.

================================================================================
-- chars 3035 --
Chapter 9:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
9.1 Principles of Assessment
9.2 Anemia
9.3 Polycythemia and Myelofibrosis
9.4 White Blood Cell Diseases or Abnormalities
9.5 Hemorrhagic and Platelet Disorders
9.6 Thrombotic Disorders
9.7 Hematologic Impairment Evaluation Summary
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairment of the hematopoietic system. The hematopoietic system, including the bone marrow, lymph nodes, and spleen, produces a heterogeneous population of blood-circulating cells (eg, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets) and a complex family of proteins critical for blood clotting and immune defenses. Cells from this system also produce proteins that affect daily physiologic responses (eg, granulocyte, granulocyte-macrophage stimulating factors, etc) and respond to many pathologic stimuli (eg, tumor necrosis factor and interleukins). Because the hematopoietic system supports other cells or organs of the body, identifiable defects are assigned impairment ratings only secondarily through altered function of other end organs. For example, very severe anemia can reduce oxygen delivery to the point where the individual suffers a myocardial infarction or stroke. Age and comorbid conditions further complicate the determination of impairment. Most of the products of the hematopoietic system also include remarkable compensatory biologic mechanisms.
191
Clinical alterations can be hereditary or acquired. Because of functional adaptation of the young, hereditary defects manifest in childhood are commonly modest in degree of impairment. With age, alterations become more definitive and functional impairment more evident. Abnormalities can be quantitative—production of too many cells (ie, leukemia or polycythemia) or too few cells (ie, anemia or thrombocytopenia)—or they can be qualitative, with production of a defective protein (ie, factor V Leiden or prothrombin 20210A) resulting in an increased propensity for thrombosis.
This edition of the Guides has expanded sections on human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and thrombotic disorders.
9.1 Principles of Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.
9.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs Some impairment classes refer to symptoms that limit the ability to perform daily activities. When this information is subjective and open to misinterpretation, it should not serve as the sole criterion upon which decisions about impairment are made. Rather, the examiner should obtain objective data about the limitations’ extent and integrate those findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent impairment.
-- chars 3001 --
Impairment percentages reflect severity of symptoms, physical and laboratory findings, and estimated functional limitations resulting from hematologic abnormality. See Table 9-1 for the functional classifications of hematologic system disease. The activities of daily living are listed in Table 1-2 and the Glossary.
9.1 b Description of Procedures
Aids to diagnose hematologic impairment vary depending on the suspected diagnosis. Common tests include a complete blood count, bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, hemoglobin electrophoresis, direct and indirect antiglobulin test and cold agglutinin assay, flow cytometry, cytogenetics of peripheral blood and/or bone marrow, immunochemical analysis of immunoglobulins, fat pad biopsy with Congo red stain, and hemostasis studies.
9.2  Anemia
The functional effects of chronic anemia depend on the degree of the cardiovascular system’s compensatory response. Regardless of the anemia’s pathogenesis, impairment is related to the heart’s inability to deliver adequate oxygen to tissues. To compensate for the anemia, the heart increases cardiac output by acceleration of heart rate and also increases oxygen extraction from the tissues (ie, increases arteriovenous difference). Therefore, a person with a mild anemia (hemoglobin level of about 10 g/dL) and a normal cardiovascular system receives a lower impairment rating than a person with underlying dysfunction of the cardiovascular system.
Symptoms of anemia include shortness of breath on exertion, dizziness, throbbing headaches, and fatigue. The speed at which anemia develops at any hemoglobin level correlates to the complexity of symptoms. Greater degrees of anemia may be associated with lack of stamina, fatigue on exertion, fatigue at rest, and dyspnea at rest. Thus, no specific concentrations of hemoglobin determine impairment.
Anemia impairment is measured by the limitations of
The Hematopoietic System
193
cardiovascular response and may be lessened by a successful blood transfusion.
Many forms of anemia are reversible with specific therapy. Anemias resulting from decreased red cell production due to nutrient deficit (eg, iron-deficiency anemia, megaloblastic anemia secondary to folic acid,
of impairment is related to the anemia’s severity, need for transfusion, and impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living. Additional organ system impairment due to anemia can be combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
The benefits of red blood cell transfusion normally
vitamin B
deficiency, etc) are correctable with spe-
last 6 to 8 weeks. In individuals with hemolytic ane-
cific nutrient therapy.
A permanent impairment may develop from sequelae of the anemia. In megaloblastic anemia due to B deficiency, significant neurologic deficit caused by dysmyelinization (particularly of the posterolateral spinal tracks) may occur and result in permanent neurologic impairment. Folic acid deficiency during pregnancy may result in lifelong impairment of the newborn with varying degrees of neural tube defects. In some circumstances of hypoproliferative anemia from chronic renal failure, the anemia is correctable with exogenous erythropoietin even though the renal failure is irreversible. Similarly, many forms of anemia due to increased and, particularly, acquired red cell destruction (ie, hemolytic anemias) are reversible with therapy and therefore do not result in permanent impairment.
-- chars 3433 --
Persistent hemolytic anemia may cause a degree of impairment that is related to the anemia’s severity. This impairment consideration also applies to aplastic or refractory anemia caused by defective bone marrow function. Persistent refractory anemia may cause impairment regardless of the cause; the degree
mia caused by serum factors, and in some who have had many transfusions, the survival rate of transfused cells is shortened and transfusions must be repeated every 1 to 5 weeks. Impairment increases as hemolysis becomes more severe.
In congenital hemolytic anemias, particularly those related to altered hemoglobin synthesis (eg, hemoglobinopathies and thalassemias), tissue impairment beyond the hematopoietic system results in permanent impairment.1 Sickle cell diseases, especially sickle cell anemia, are commonly associated with severe, painful vaso-occlusive crisis that can result in functional impairment of varying degrees.2 These vascular occlusive lesions result in end-organ damage to the bones, heart, kidneys, and liver, compounding the degree of impairment.
9.2 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Anemia
The impairment criteria for anemia are given in Table 9-2.
†Implies hemolysis of transfused blood.
Polycythemia can produce end-organ damage to cardiovascular or cerebrovascular areas due to vascular occlusion. Vascular obstruction of the postal venous system similarly can produce end-organ injury to the liver. The impairment rating is based on the end organ involved, degree of injury, and impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living.
The Hematopoietic System
197
The criteria for diagnosis of myelofibrosis, of primary (idiopathic) or secondary (postpolycythemic) etiology, include progressive anemia with red cell changes of anisocytosis and poikilocytosis, a shift to the left of the granulocytic white cell series, and, often, nucleated red blood cells in the peripheral blood. Bone marrow indicates fibrosis with dilated sinusoids and clustering of megakaryocytes. The degree of impairment due to myelofibrosis is reflected by the degree of impairment due to the anemia. Examples are provided in the impairment section on anemia (also see Table 9-2).
Two types of leukemia, acute granulocytic leukemia and chronic granulocytic leukemia, result in impaired function of the individual and limited life expectancy, even with currently available therapy. Impairment is based on symptoms, physical findings, requirement for and frequency of therapy, and the ability to carry out activities of daily living.
9.4 b Lymphocytes
Lymphocytes provide humoral and cellular defense mechanisms. Circulating lymphocytes originate in lymphoid tissues: the bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes, and thymus. Lymphocytes circulate between the blood and the tissues. Lymphocyte cells have heterogeneous functions.
Of the two major subgroups, the “T,” or thymusderived, lymphocytes are primarily responsible for cellular immunity and are involved in delayed hypersensitivity reactions and transplant rejection. The “B,” or bursa-derived, lymphocytes are primarily responsible for humoral immunity related to the production of immunoglobulins and biologically active kinins. Subtypes of both T and B lymphoctyes have distinct functions and abnormalities that produce distinct clinical syndromes.
-- chars 3335 --
Lymphocytes can be abnormal in function and/or number, often leading to recurrent infections.
Individuals with Hodgkin’s disease or connective tissue diseases and those who have been exposed to ionizing radiation all have acquired functional defects. Some “autoimmune” diseases may be a result of functionally altered or numerically predominant subsets of lymphocytes. Impairment ratings due to abnormal numbers of lymphocytes, as with lymphopenia, are based on the severity of the condition, as indicated by recurrent infection, and a limited ability to perform activities of daily living.
The best documentation of defective lymphocyte function or numbers is to determine failure of end functions like generalized immunoglobulin deficiency or delayed hypersensitivity reaction failure. Lymphocyte abnormalities are associated with three forms of neoplastic transformation: (1) leukemias (including chronic lymphatic leukemia, chronic myelogenous leukemia, acute lymphatic leukemia, and hairy cell leukemia)4; (2) lymphomas (including Hodgkin’s disease, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and mycosis fungoides); and (3) multiple myeloma and macroglobulinemia.
Chronic lymphatic leukemia, hairy cell leukemia, and some low-grade lymphomas may be relatively indolent, require no initial therapy unless severe and irreversible, and constitute no impairment for several years. Similarly, multiple myeloma and macroglo bulinemia may be asymptomatic initially, manifested only by certain laboratory abnormalities, and consti-
tute no impairment. However, some individuals have a high level of impairment because of recurrent GI tract bleeding. Impairment may be related to developing anemia, the need for chemotherapy or radiation to enlarging lymph nodes, or, in the case of multiple myeloma, bone pain. See Chapters 6, The Digestive System; 16, The Upper Extremities; 17, The Lower Extremities; and 18, Pain, for more information about intestinal bleeding and bone pain.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection creates a progressive and ultimately fatal disease process with a complex course and widely variable degrees of functional impairment. HIV can directly destroy CD4T lymphocytes, resulting in impairment of the normal immune response against infection and neoplastic processes. The risk of developing opportunistic infection is, in general, inversely related to the absolute CD4 count.5, 6
HIV infection impairment is caused by singleor multiple-organ system involvement from primary HIV infection or the opportunistic infection or neoplastic process from immunologic dysfunction.
Essentially, every organ system can be affected, including hematologic, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, neurologic, dermatologic, and renal. Several systems are often simultaneously affected, adding to the complexity of impairment determination.
Acute retroviral syndrome may develop early in HIV infection; symptoms include fever, fatigue, pharyngitis, rash, myalgia, and arthralgia. Quantitative HIV RNA measurements also indicate the extent of
-- chars 3026 --
HIV infection. Early stages are characterized by a CD4 count greater than 0.50 ? 109/L (500 cells/mm3); individuals are often asymptomatic but may have lymphadenopathy, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and dermatologic conditions. Intermediate stages have CD4 counts of 0.20 ? 109/L to 0.50 ? 109/L (200-500 cells/mm3); antiretroviral therapy is often initiated to prolong this stage of disease. Individuals may have few or no symptoms or may develop constitutional symptoms, diarrhea, herpes simplex infection, oral or vaginal candidiasis, upper respiratory tract infection, sinusitis, or common bacterial infection. Advanced stages, often defined by CD4 counts less than 0.20 ? 109/L (200 cells/mm3), are associated
with an increased incidence of opportunistic infection
The Hematopoietic System
199
and meet the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) definition for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). At low CD4 level, there is increased incidence of complications, including Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP); Toxoplasma gondii encephalitis; tuberculosis; cryptosporidiosis salmonellosis; esophageal candidiasis; neoplasms including Kaposi’s sarcoma, lymphoma, and cervical cancer; and neurologic dysfunction, such as mononeuritis multiplex, peripheral neuropathies, cranial nerve palsies, and myelitis. At CD4 levels below
0.10 ? 109/L (100 cells mm3), the following are more common: HIV-associated dementia, wasting syndromes, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis, disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC), cryptococcal meningitis, disseminated coccidiomycosis, histoplasmosis, and invasive aspergillosis.
The degree of symptomatic involvement and the course of illness in individuals with the same CD4 cell-defined stages varies significantly. Functional impairment can also develop from toxicity responses to antiretroviral treatments, including reverse transcriptase inhibitors; viral protease enzyme inhibitors; and antibacterial, antiviral, antifungal, and antineoplastic therapy. Determine total impairment only after careful assessment of each of the potentially affected organ systems. Also consider the nature and severity of the primary or secondary infections or neoplastic processes. If several organ systems are involved in the HIV infection process, the whole person impairment percentages related to the involved systems are combined using the Combined Values Chart (see p. 604).
9.4 c Monocytes-Macrophages
The monocyte-macrophage family ingests foreign proteins, removes cellular debris, particulates material, and modulates immune responses. This functional unit of circulating monocytes and fixed macrophages, “histiocytes,” is structurally associated with endothelial cells and fibroblasts in the reticuloendothelial system. This system is recognized primarily by the phagocytic capacity of monocytes and macrophages.
Knowledge about functional defects in the monocyte-macrophage system is limited. The degree of impairment can be associated with the nature, type, and extent of infection. Lipid storage disease is another abnormality in which macrophages become repositories for lipids, and cellular and organ hyperplasia occurs in the spleen, lymph nodes, and
-- chars 3251 --
bone marrow. Marrow involvement can produce progressive and massive bone abnormalities and fractures; impairment focuses on the degree of orthopedic deficit.
Neurologic involvement also occurs in some severe forms of lipid storage disease. Enzyme replacement therapy is now available for Gaucher disease, one of the most common types of lipid storage disease.
This therapy is incredibly effective at reversing most abnormalities except for neurologic deficit. Impairment depends on the nature of the lipid, rate of deposition, and primarily affected organs.
Neoplastic transformation occurs primarily as acute monocytic leukemia, a relatively rare form of leukemia. Leukemic reticuloendotheliosis is a more chronic variant. The exact cell of origin is not clear, but the condition behaves as a form of chronic neoplastic transformation.
9.4d The Spleen and Splenectomy
A normal spleen cleanses the blood of bacteria and other foreign matter. Splenectomy removes a quarter of the total lymphoid tissue and the major mass of macrophages. As a consequence of splenectomy, some functional abnormalities may develop. These include impaired clearance of certain encapsulated bacteria, such as the pneumococcus. Occasionally, individuals develop overwhelming infections after splenectomy. This occurs in fewer than 2% of people from whom the organ has been removed and is confined mostly to the first 2 years after the operation. The incidence is greatly reduced by prophylactic administration of the polyvalent pneumococcal vaccine. Splenectomy leads to some subtle, albeit clinically silent, morphologic abnormalities of red blood cells and a slight elevation of the platelet count. Splenectomized individuals are not at an increased risk for viral or other infections from nonencapsulated bacteria.
9.4 e Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to White Blood Cell Disease
The impairment criteria for white blood cell disease are given in Table 9-3.
9.5 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Hemorrhagic and Platelet Disorders
The impairment criteria for hemorrhagic and platelet disorders are given in Table 9-4.
Individuals with a greater risk of thrombosis require temporary (postsurgery) to lifelong (prophylaxis for inherited thrombotic disorder and recurrent thrombosis) anticoagulation therapy. Hyperhomocysteinemia can be controlled with high doses of folates; arterial thrombosis is treated according to the system involved.
Thrombotic disorder impairment results from systematic complications following thrombosis and anticoagulation regimen. It depends on the type, site, and extent of the organ involvement, as well as the response and complications of anticoagulation.
Arterial thrombi may produce ischemic heart disease, stroke, or intermittent claudication. Venous thrombosis usually resolves with no aftereffects. If unresolved, postthrombosis syndrome may develop due to vein lumen narrowing and/or venous valve insufficiency, causing lower extremity edema, venous ulceration, venous thrombosis recurrence, and ambulation limitation.
-- chars 3064 --
9.6c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Thrombotic Disorders Impairment is evaluated according to the affected body system. The impairment rating for a thrombotic disorder is based upon the degree of injury to the end organ, such as the lungs, heart, brain, kidney, extremities, etc, and upon how the disorder affects the individual’s capacity to perform activities of daily living. For example, a thrombotic disorder causing a stroke would be rated based on the effects of the stroke, as outlined in the nervous system. Long-term anticoagulation with warfarin or low-molecular-weight heparin increases bleeding risk and constitutes impairment in the 10% range. If there is an impairment rating of several organ systems, whole person impairment ratings for each affected system are combined (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

================================================================================
Chapter 10:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Endocrine System
10.1 Principles of Assessment
10.2 Hypothalamic-Pituitary Axis
10.3 Thyroid
10.4 Parathyroids
10.5 Adrenal Cortex
10.6 Adrenal Medulla
10.7 Pancreas (Islets of Langerhans)
10.8 Gonads
10.9 Mammary Glands
10.10 Metabolic Bone Disease
10.11 Endocrine System Impairment Evaluation Summary

-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairment of the endocrine system. The endocrine system is composed of the hypothalmicpituitary complex, thyroid, parathyroids, adrenals, islet cell tissue of the pancreas, and gonads. These ductless glands secrete hormones that regulate the activity of organs or tissues of the body. These hormones control growth, bone structure, sexual development and function, metabolism, and electrolyte balance. The various endocrine glands are usually interdependent, and a disorder of one gland may be reflected by dysfunction in one or more of the other endocrine glands, which, in turn, may affect other body systems. Consider multiple system effects when an endocrine permanent impairment is identified.

The following revisions have been made for the fifth edition: (1) the descriptions of endocrine gland function and of disease states have been updated, as well as the techniques for evaluation of these diseases;
(2) the nomenclature of test procedures and of disease entities, such as diabetes mellitus, has been updated; and (3) although the criteria for percentage of impairment have remained the same, many more examples of impairment have been included.
--break--
10.1 Principles of Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods of performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluations.

Dysfunction of an endocrine organ may be the result of an injury to the gland or of disease involving atrophy, hypertrophy, hyperplasia, or neoplasia. An endocrine impairment develops from altered hormone secretion by one or more endocrine glands and the effect of such hormonal aberration on nonendocrine tissue. An impairment rating reflects the severity of the medical condition, the need for medication, and the effects of the impairment on the individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living.
-- chars 3476 --

When an endocrine disorder results in decreased secretion of a hormone, it is usually possible to replace the hormone by either the oral or the parenteral route, resulting in virtual normalization of body physiology except, of course, for the inability to secrete the hormone. Apart from the need to take the medication on an ongoing basis, decreased secretion alone does not warrant an impairment rating. In cases where the replacement hormone does not completely mimic physiologic hormone secretion, however, the individual may be given an impairment rating to reflect the change in terms of either normal activity or ability to respond to stress.

Endocrine deficiencies may cause or be associated with impairments of other organ systems. Impairment ratings in other body systems are evaluated separately and then combined with the impairment rating from this chapter, using the Combined Values Chart
(p. 604) to determine the estimated whole person impairment.

Disorders resulting in increased secretion of a hormone often can be effectively treated. In some cases, treatment may leave the individual with a reduced ability to secrete the hormone. If so, the severity of the resulting condition and the effect on the ability to perform activities of daily living are evaluated to determine the impairment rating.

As stated in Chapter 2, even with appropriate medication, it is debatable whether the individual has regained the previous status of good health. Thus, the examiner may increase the impairment rating by a small percentage (1% to 3%) to account for an incomplete return to a condition of normal health.

--break--
10.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
The endocrine system has a wide array of glands, each with specific symptoms; these symptoms are discussed in each gland section.

--break--
10.1 b Description of Clinical Studies Clinical studies for the endocrine system generally assess hyperfunction (increased) or hypofunction (decreased) of a specific gland and are discussed in detail in each section.

--break--
10.2 HypothalamicPituitary Axis
The hypothalamus and the pituitary are regarded as a unit because of their interdependent function. The hypothalamus produces chemical factors that either inhibit or enhance production of anterior pituitary hormones. The hypothalamus also produces precursors (prohormones) of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and oxytocin, which travel through neural axons and are stored in the posterior pituitary.

The anterior lobe of the pituitary gland, with modulation by the hypothalamus, produces trophic hormones that control the activity of the thyroid gland (thyrotropin [TSH]), the adrenal gland (corticotropin [ACTH]), and the gonads (luteinizing hormone [LH] and follicle-stimulating hormone [FSH]). The production of growth hormone (GH) and prolactin (PRL) in the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland is also modulated by hypothalamic substances. These two hormones, however, exert their effects directly upon the tissues of the body rather than through stimulation of other hormones. Growth hormone is responsible for growth of the skeleton before epiphyseal closure and, in the adult, maintains normal fat, muscle, glucose, and skeletal metabolism, as well as a sense of well-being. For women, prolactin is necessary for lactation following delivery and for milk production in the suckling process. Its role in the male has not been ascertained.
-- chars 3419 --

The posterior lobe of the pituitary is an extension of hypothalamic neurons. It is the location where antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin) and oxytocin are converted from their prohormone state and released into the blood. Antidiuretic hormone regulates the fluid balance of the body through its ability to influence the excretion of water. The actions of oxytocin may have a role in the process of labor.

Permanent impairments due to altered function of the thyroid gland, adrenal glands, gonads, and growth hormone are discussed in subsequent sections of this chapter.

--break--
10.2 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Hypothalamic and pituitary diseases can cause impairments through either structural abnormalities or alterations in hormone production. Structural changes resulting in end-organ impairment are considered in the relevant chapter. Visual field abnormalities are considered in Chapter 12, The Visual System. Temporal lobe seizures, frontal lobe abnormalities, obstructive hydrocephalus, and nonendocrine hypothalamic dysfunction are considered in Chapter 13, The Nervous System.

Hypersecretion by the anterior lobe may be manifested by (1) prolactin hypersecretion resulting from a microadenoma or macroadenoma (prolactinoma),
(2) growth hormone hypersecretion caused by a pituitary adenoma, or (3) corticotropin hypersecretion leading to adrenocortical hyperfunction. Prolactin excess results in hypogonadism, which in women may lead to amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea, infertility, varying degrees of estrogen deficiency with its detrimental effect on the vascular and skeletal systems, decreased libido, and galactorrhea. In men, it may result in decreased libido, impotence, or infertility. Impairment from prolactin excess is equivalent to gonadotropic deficiency of the appropriate end organ, that is, secondary ovarian failure in women and testicular failure in men. Gonadal failure is discussed further in Section 10.8 of this chapter.

When growth hormone hypersecretion occurs before epiphyseal closure, gigantism results; when hypersecretion occurs in the adult, acromegaly results. The manifestations of acromegaly include enlargement of the hands and feet, coarseness of facial features, and prognathism. Fatigue and increased perspiration are common symptoms. Acromegaly of long duration leads to morbidity from degenerative arthritis, peripheral neuropathy, and shortened life expectancy resulting from an increased incidence of cardiovascular disease. Growth hormone excess may lead to insulin resistance and glucose intolerance, and it may precipitate or exacerbate diabetes mellitus.

Hyposecretion of a single or of multiple anterior lobe hormones is known as hypopituitarism, and the deficiencies may be either partial or complete. In the adult years, pituitary tumors, infarction (especially postpartum infarction), and surgical or radiotherapeutic interventions are the most common causes, with a lower incidence caused by granulomatous and infiltrative diseases and head trauma.
-- chars 3023 --

In adults, hypopituitarism most often results in hypogonadism and a deficiency of growth hormone production. The most common symptoms of hypogonadism in men are impotence, weakness, decreased motivation, and depression. The most common presenting symptom of hypogonadism in women is amenorrhea. Growth hormone deficiency is accompanied most often by muscle weakness and reduced exercise capacity, fat accumulation (especially intraabdominal), decreased bone density, lack of motivation, a poor sense of well-being, and social isolation. Postpartum pituitary infarction also results in an inability to lactate. Hypopituitarism in a person with diabetes mellitus results in decreasing insulin requirements with an increased incidence of hypoglycemic episodes. Effects of dysfunction of TSH and ACTH secretion will be discussed in Sections
--break--
10.3 and 10.5, respectively.

Hyperfunction of the posterior lobe, which causes the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH), may result from a variety of central nervous system disorders; however, SIADH is rarely permanent. Inability of the kidneys to secrete a water load leads to hyponatremia if water intake is not restricted. Fatigue and lethargy, progressing to confusion, coma, and seizures, may result depending on the degree of hyponatremia.

Hypofunction of the posterior lobe results in ADH deficiency and diabetes insipidus. Hypofunction usually stems from diseases involving the hypothalamus or pituitary stalk and, less commonly, from diseases of the pituitary gland itself. The hypofunction may be hereditary, or it may be related to trauma, surgery, metastatic tumors, craniopharyngioma, histiocytosis X, or other conditions. If thirst response is normal, diabetes insipidus is mostly an inconvenience because of polyuria, polydipsia, and nocturia. If the inability to ingest an adequate amount of fluid ensues or if thirst is impaired because of concomitant hypothalamic disease, severe dehydration and hypernatremia may result, leading to central nervous system changes, eg, mental depression or coma.

--break--
10.2 b Description of Clinical Studies Structural abnormalities are evaluated by roentgenograms of the sella turcica, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Angiography occasionally is required.
Evaluation of visual fields may be needed; vision impairments are discussed in Guides Chapter 12, The Visual System.

Hormonal function must be assessed, and this is often done by stimulation or suppression testing. Growth hormone deficiency is assessed by measuring GH in the blood after stimulation testing with insulin, exercise, levodopa, arginine, or other agents. Corticotropin deficiency is assessed by measuring serum corticotropin and cortisol levels and by stimulation testing with insulin or corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH).

The diagnosis of secondary hypothyroidism (pituitary and hypothalamic hypothyroidism) is made by demonstrating low concentrations of thyroid hormones without elevation of the thyrotropin level. In this circumstance, CT scanning or MRI and tests of pituitary function, including measurement of thyrotropin secretion after an injection of protirelin (TRH), are needed to determine whether the hypothalamus or the pituitary is responsible. Secondary gonadal insufficiency, that is, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, requires the demonstration of endorgan failure, with low testosterone levels in men and low estrogen levels in women, as well as low or normal levels of the gonadotropins, LH and FSH.
-- chars 3560 --

Insufficiency of antidiuretic hormone requires the documentation of urine hyposmolality in the face of a stimulus to concentrate urine, usually water restriction. Subsequently, an increase in urine osmolality in response to ADH administration must be demonstrated. Prolactin deficiency is documented by low basal levels of the hormone and its failure to increase after an injection of TRH, chlorpromazine, or other stimulating agents.

Growth hormone excess is documented by the failure to suppress GH concentration after a glucose load.
Prolactin excess is documented by measurement of elevated basal levels of prolactin. Inappropriate secretion of ADH is documented by hyponatremia with inappropriately elevated urine osmolality, in the presence of normal cardiac, renal, adrenal, and thyroid function.

--break--
10.2 c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Hypothalamic-Pituitary Axis Disorders
The assessment of permanent impairment of the whole person from disorders of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis requires evaluation of (l) primary abnormalities related to GH, prolactin, or ADH; (2) secondary abnormalities in other endocrine glands, such as thyroid, adrenal, and gonads; and (3) structural and functional disorders of the central nervous system caused by anatomic abnormalities of the pituitary.

The examiner must evaluate each disorder separately, using the guidelines in this or other chapters, such as those on the visual system (Chapter 12), nervous system (Chapter 13), or mental and behavioral disorders (Chapter 14). The estimated impairments of the various organ systems then should be combined by means of the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
Criteria for evaluating permanent impairment resulting from hypothalamic-pituitary axis disorders are given in Table 10-1.

An individual with hypothalamic-pituitary disease belongs in class 1 when the disease can be controlled effectively with continuous treatment, with minimal impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living. If a person does not take the medication, a different degree of impairment may result.

An individual with hypothalamic-pituitary disease belongs in class 2 when the related symptoms and signs are inadequately controlled by treatment and impact ability to perform activities of daily living.

An individual with hypothalamic-pituitary disease belongs in class 3 when severe symptoms and signs persist despite treatment and significantly impact ability to perform activities of daily living.

--break--
10.3 Thyroid

--break--
10.3 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
The thyroid gland, through its secretion of hormones, influences the metabolic rate of many organ systems. Hypersecretion and hyposecretion of thyroid hormones cause impairments. Hypersecretion by the thyroid gland results in hyperthyroidism and may be manifested by nervousness, weight loss, heat intolerance, goiter, tachycardia, palpitation, atrial fibrillation, frequent bowel movements, tremor, and muscle weakness. Eye changes, such as exophthalmos and double vision, may also be present. Hyposecretion by the thyroid gland results in hypothyroidism and may be manifested by lethargy, slowing of mental processes, weakness, cold intolerance, dry skin, constipation, and myxedema. Late complications include myocardial insufficiency, effusions into body cavities, and coma. Hypothyroidism in infancy may be associated with failure of physical and mental development.
-- chars 3459 --
--break--
10.3
b Description of Clinical Studies These include, but are not limited to, determination of (1) circulating thyroid hormone levels, including
total thyroxine, free thyroxine, triiodothyronine, and free triiodothyronine; (2) circulating pituitary thyrotropin level measured by a sensitive assay;
(3) radioiodine uptake of the thyroid gland; (4) thyroid antibodies; and (5) radiotriiodothyronine resin or red blood cell uptake. The nature of thyroid nodules is often best evaluated by needle aspiration or biopsy.

--break--
10.3 c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Thyroid Disease
In practically all individuals with hyperthyroidism, the condition can be corrected by treatment and there is no loss in the ability to perform activities of daily living. However, the ophthalmopathy seen in some cases of hyperthyroidism may persist after treatment of the thyrotoxic state and result in permanent cosmetic disfigurement or visual impairment. In severe cases, loss of vision may result. These conditions should be evaluated as described in the chapters on the ear, nose, throat, and related structures (Chapter 11) and the visual system (Chapter 12). When atrial fibrillation persists following adequate treatment of hyperthyroidism, this condition should be evaluated as described in the chapters on the cardiovascular system (Chapters 3 and 4).

In most instances, hypothyroidism can be controlled satisfactorily by the administration of thyroid medication. Occasionally, because of associated disease in other organ systems, full hormone replacement may not be possible. Table 10-2 gives the criteria for rating permanent impairment due to thyroid disease.

Diagnosis: Hashimoto’s thyroiditis controlled by treatment.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Regular monitoring of thyroid disease.

An individual belongs in class l when (1) continuous thyroid therapy is required for correction of the thyroid insufficiency or for maintenance of normal thyroid anatomy and (2) there is no objective physical or laboratory evidence of inadequate replacement therapy.

--break--
10.4  Parathyroids
The secretion of parathyroid hormone from the four parathyroid glands regulates the levels of serum calcium and phosphorus, which are essential to the proper functioning of the skeletal, digestive, renal, and nervous systems. The major abnormalities of the glands include hyperfunction, hypofunction, and carcinoma.

--break--
10.4 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Hypersecretion of parathyroid hormone, or hyperparathyroidism, may be due to the hyperfunctioning of one gland, as with an adenoma, or that of all four glands, as with hyperplasia, or may result from a parathyroid carcinoma. Manifestations of this condition include lethargy, constipation, nausea, vomiting, and polyuria, and, in extreme cases, bone pain, renal calculi, renal failure, and coma.

Hyposecretion of parathyroid hormone, or hypoparathyroidism, may be congenital in origin or due to inadvertent removal of the parathyroid glands during thyroidectomy, surgical excision for the treatment of hyperparathyroidism, or unknown causes.
-- chars 3158 --
Manifestations include chronic fatigue, paresthesia, tetany, and seizures. Additionally, in idiopathic cases, there may be cataracts, chronic moniliasis of the skin, alopecia, and hypofunction of other endocrine organs, including hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, adrenal insufficiency, hypogonadism, and pernicious anemia.
--break--
10.4
b Description of Clinical Studies Techniques for evaluating parathyroid gland function include determinations of serum calcium, phosphorus, albumin, creatinine, magnesium, parathyroid hormone levels, 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D, calcium concentration in urine, and urinary cyclic adenosine monophosphate response to intravenously administered parathyroid hormone. Intravenous pyelography, skeletal roentgenography, and bone density studies may be useful. Ultrasonography, MRI, and CT and sestamibi scanning are useful tools in localizing parathyroid adenomas.

--break--
10.4 c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Parathyroid Disease
Hyperparathyroidism
In most cases of hyperparathyroidism, surgical treatment results in correction of the primary abnormality, although secondary symptoms and signs may persist, such as fracture, renal calculi, or renal failure. The latter signs should be evaluated according to criteria in the chapters on the urinary and reproductive systems (Chapter 7) or musculoskeletal system (Chapters 15 through 17). If surgery fails, or if the individual cannot undergo surgery, long-term therapy may be necessary, in which case the permanent impairment may be classified according to the criteria in Table 10-3.

Hypoparathyroidism
Hypoparathyroidism is a chronic condition of variable severity that requires long-term medical therapy in most cases. The degree of severity determines the estimated permanent impairment rating, as Table 10-4 indicates.

--break--
10.5  Adrenal Cortex
The adrenal cortex synthesizes and secretes adrenocortical hormones. These hormones participate in the regulation of electrolyte and water metabolism and in the intermediate metabolism of carbohydrate, fat, and protein. They also affect inflammatory response, cell membrane permeability, and immunologic responses, and they play a role in the development and maintenance of secondary sexual characteristics.

Impairment may result from either hypersecretion or hyposecretion of the cortical hormones. Such abnormalities may be associated with dysfunction of another endocrine gland, for example, the pituitary. If this occurs, the adrenal impairment and the impairment related to the other gland are both evaluated, and the impairments are combined by means of the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to determine the whole person impairment.

--break--
10.5 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Hypersecretion of adrenocortical hormones results from hyperplasia or from benign or malignant tumors of the adrenal cortex. The symptoms and signs of adrenocortical disease may arise from hypersecretion of one or more of the following hormones: (1) glucocorticoids, (2) mineralocorticoids,
-- chars 3039 --
(3) androgens, and (4) estrogens. In some instances, there may be hypersecretion of hormones in one category and hyposecretion of those in another. Iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome secondary to supraphysiologic doses of glucocorticoids administered for systemic diseases such as bronchial asthma, systemic lupus erythematosus, or rheumatoid arthritis is the most common condition related to adrenal hormonal excess.

Among the diseases caused by hypersecretion of the adrenocortical hormones are Cushing’s syndrome, the adrenogenital syndrome, and primary aldosteronism. Hypersecretion of the adrenal cortex caused by hyperplasia may be associated either with a tumor of the anterior pituitary gland or with a malignant tumor that arises outside the endocrine system and causes ectopic corticotropin secretion.

Hyposecretion of adrenocortical hormones may be primary, resulting from surgical removal or destruction of the adrenals, as with Addison’s disease or by metastatic cancer; secondary, resulting from decreased production of corticotropin; or tertiary, resulting from decreased production of corticotropinreleasing hormone by the hypothalamus. Therapy is guided by the number of hormonal deficiencies, which may be single, as in hypoaldosteronism, or multiple, as in adrenocortical destruction. One normal adrenal gland can compensate for the loss of the other.

--break--
10.5 b Description of Clinical Studies These techniques include (1) measurement of adrenocortical hormones in the urine, such as free cortisol and aldosterone, and of hormones in the plasma, such as cortisol and aldosterone; (2) meas-
urement of corticotropin, serum electrolytes, plasma glucose, and creatinine; (3) measurement of the effects of suppression and stimulation of adrenocortical function; and (4) roentgenography of the adrenal glands, CT scanning, MRI, arteriography, and venography of the pituitary drainage.

--break--
10.5 c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Adrenal Cortex Disease
Hypoadrenalism is a lifelong condition that requires long-term replacement therapy with glucocorticoids and/or mineralocorticoids for proven hormonal deficiencies. Evaluation of improvement may be difficult because a person may be fully functional
on an everyday basis while taking replacement medication but not be able to respond properly to the stress of fever, trauma, infection, or very warm weather. This impaired ability to respond to stress needs careful consideration. Impairments should be classified according to Table 10-5.

Hyperadrenocorticism caused by the chronic side effects of supraphysiologic doses of glucocorticoids, that is, iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome, is related to dosage and duration of treatment and may cause osteoporosis, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and the catabolic effects that result in cataracts, aseptic necrosis, myopathy, striae, and easy bruising.
Permanent impairments may range from 0% to 100%, depending on the severity and chronicity of the disease process for which the steroids are given. Impairments from diseases of the pituitary-adrenal axis should be estimated according to Table 10-6.
-- chars 3135 --

† The degree of estimated impairment will depend on the effects of the tumor on other organ systems; appropriate Guides chapters should be consulted

--break--
10.6  Adrenal Medulla
--break--
10.6 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
The adrenal medulla synthesizes and secretes primarily epinephrine, which functions in the regulation of blood pressure and cardiac output and, to some extent, affects the intermediary metabolism of the body. The adrenal medulla is usually not essential to the maintenance of life or well-being. Its absence may constitute a permanent impairment rating if an abnormality is detected in the individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living, especially in the response to stress. Hyperfunction of the adrenal medulla may be caused by pheochromocytomas or, rarely, by hyperplasia of the chromaffin cells.
Pheochromocytomas may arise at any site in the body that has sympathetic nervous tissue. The presence of a pheochromocytoma is usually associated with paroxysmal or sustained hypertension and may produce manifestations of coronary artery disease. Pheochromocytomas may be multiple in an individual and may occur in families in association with medullary carcinoma of the thyroid and hyperplasia of the parathyroids; this constitutes the syndrome of multiple endocrine neoplasia. Approximately 10% of pheochromocytomas are malignant.

--break--
10.6 b Description of Clinical Studies
These techniques include (1) measurement of unmetabolized urinary catecholamines, including total catecholamines, epinephrine, and norepinephrine, and of their degradation products in urine, vanillylmandelic acid, and metanephrines; (2) measurement of the plasma catecholamines, epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine; (3) suppressive response of catecholamines to oral clonidine; (4) radiography of the adrenals by CT scanning and MRI; and (5) nucleotide scanning with 123I/ 131I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG).

--break--
10.6 c Criteria for Evaluating Permanent Impairment Due to Adrenal Medulla Disease
Permanent impairment related to a pheochromocytoma may be classified by means of Table 10-7.

--break--
10.7 Pancreas (Islets of Langerhans)
Insulin and glucagon are among the hormones secreted by the islets of Langerhans. Both hormones are required for the maintenance of normal metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins.
Permanent impairment may result from a deficiency or an excess of either hormone. Removal of normal pancreatic tissue during the resection of an islet cell neoplasm does not constitute an endocrine impairment if, after the operation, the individual’s carbohydrate tolerance is normal.
--break--
10.7
a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Abnormalities of islet cell function may be manifested by high plasma glucose levels, as in diabetes mellitus, or by low plasma glucose levels, as in hypoglycemia. Diabetes mellitus is classified into two main groups: type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes. The complications of diabetes mellitus fall into two general categories: (1) those that are directly related to the degree of hyperglycemia and (2) the chronic complications resulting from inadequate control of hyperglycemia and lipid metabolism over many years.
-- chars 3230 --

People with type 1, if untreated, will develop severe hyperglycemia and ketonemia, resulting in dehydration, weight loss, and severe weakness, ultimately progressing into stupor, coma, and then death. This type of diabetes mellitus usually begins in young persons, but it may occur at any age.

People with type 2 generally are over 40 years old and overweight. In the early years of this disease, these people do not develop severe hyperglycemia and its associated symptoms and, indeed, may not experience any symptoms of the disease. In later years, when insulin production falls significantly, the hyperglycemic symptoms become more evident.

The main chronic complications of diabetes mellitus and associated impairments are (1) retinopathy, causing visual impairment; (2) nephropathy, causing renal impairment; (3) neuropathy, causing various neuropathic impairments; and (4) atherosclerosis, causing atherosclerotic heart disease, as well as cerebrovascular and peripheral vascular disease.

Hypoglycemia occasionally causes impairment. It may result from excessive insulin that either is produced endogenously or administered by injection. Hypoglycemia may be manifested by weakness, sweating, tachycardia, headache, confusion, muscular incoordination, blurred vision, loss of consciousness, and convulsions. Prolonged hypoglycemia or repeated severe attacks of hypoglycemia may lead to mental deterioration and brain damage.

--break--
10.7 b Diabetes Mellitus
Description of Clinical Studies
These techniques include, but are not limited to (1) determination of fasting and postprandial plasma glucose levels; (2) determination of hemoglobin A1c level; (3) measurements of levels of triglycerides, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, and other lipids; (4) electrocardiogram or cardiac stress testing;
(5) ophthalmologic examination; (6) tests of renal function, including measurement of serum creatinine and urinary protein excretion; (7) Doppler testing of the peripheral circulation; (8) roentgenograms of the chest, gastrointestinal tract, pelvis, or extremities, including arteriograms; and (9) neurologic testing.

Although it may be useful to examine the results from blood glucose testing done by the individual at home in order to obtain an additional measure of the degree of glucose control, one must recognize that these measurements may be less objective than laboratory methods such as self-hemoglobin A1c measurement.

Much of the impairment that results from diabetes is related to the chronic complications. Therefore, the examiner must not only determine the presence or absence of retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy, but also evaluate the other systems that may be involved. Impairments of other systems would be expressed as whole person impairments and then combined with an impairment percent resulting from instability of glucose control by means of the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Diabetes Mellitus
Permanent impairment from diabetes mellitus can be rated using the criteria given in Table 10-8.
-- chars 3095 --

Distinction must be made between the presence of postprandial and postabsorptive hypoglycemia, since postabsorptive hypoglycemia suggests the possibility of a severe or even fatal disorder, whereas postprandial hypoglycemia is usually self-limited and rarely produces physical impairment.

The techniques used include, but are not limited to
(1) measurement of plasma glucose and insulin or Cpeptide after overnight or longer periods of fasting, on several occasions; (2) roentgenograms of the skull and chest and CT scan or MRI of the upper abdomen; (3) tests of liver function; and (4) tests of adrenocortical and pituitary gland function. Documented hypoglycemia requires a detailed medical evaluation to determine the specific cause.

Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Hypoglycemia
The criteria for rating permanent impairment due to hypoglycemia are given in Table 10-9.

--break--
10.8 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Precocious puberty in boys is accompanied by early and rapid somatic development and an increased rate of skeletal maturation and height velocity, but, paradoxically, it results in short adult height. It may result from various central nervous system disorders, adrenal enzyme defects, virilizing tumors, or—occasionally—as a familial condition.

Precocious puberty in girls may also be caused by various central nervous system disorders, as well as by ovarian and adrenal tumors. Often, a cause is not identified. As in boys, precocious puberty in girls results in early and rapid somatic development and an increased rate of skeletal maturation and height velocity, with ultimately short adult height. Some ovarian tumors may cause masculinization.

Some adrenal enzyme defects and neoplasms, as well as some gonadal neoplasms, may produce contrasexual precocity. Certain ovarian conditions produce irregular menstrual periods with heavy bleeding and anemia. Polycystic ovarian syndrome and several types of ovarian neoplasms may produce severe hirsutism and virilization, in addition to anovulation.

Testicular hypofunction that occurs before adolescence results in eunuchoidism, which is accompanied by diminished sexual function, infertility, and failure to develop or maintain secondary sexual characteristics. Growth of the body extends beyond the usual age because of delayed epiphyseal closure.
Individuals with this condition usually lack endurance and strength. Testicular hypofunction that occurs in adulthood results in varying degrees of regression of secondary sexual characteristics, sexual function, strength, and endurance, and it may also be accompanied by infertility.

Ovarian hypofunction, with onset before adolescence, may be characterized by primary amenorrhea, anovulation, poor development of secondary sexual characteristics, and growth beyond the usual age because of delayed maturation of the skeleton.
Menopause is a natural occurrence in older women, but it also may follow surgical removal of the ovaries. It may be accompanied by such symptoms as hot flashes, irritability, fatigue, and headaches. If not treated, osteoporosis and an enhancement of atherosclerosis may occur during later years.
-- chars 3176 --

--break--
10.8 b Description of Clinical Studies
These techniques include, but are not limited to
(1) measurements of plasma gonadotropins, prolactin, testosterone, estrogen, progesterone, DHEAS, androstenedione, and occasionally 17-ketosteroids in the urine; (2) radiographic determinations of skeletal age in children and adolescents; (3) CT scans or MRI to evaluate the pituitary, adrenals, and ovaries; (4) sex chromatin and chromosome studies;
(5) testicular biopsy; (6) semen analysis; (7) vaginal cytologic examination; (8) culdoscopy or laparoscopy; (9) endometrial biopsy; (10) ovarian biopsy; and (11) pelvic ultrasound in women.

--break--
10.8 c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Disorders of the Gonads
An individual with anatomic loss or alteration of the gonads that results in an absence, or an abnormally high level, of gonadal hormones would have 0% to 35% impairment of the whole person, as detailed in Chapter 7, The Urinary and Reproductive Systems. Impairment resulting from inability to reproduce, and other impairments associated with gonadal dysfunction, should be evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in Chapter 7.

--break--
10.9 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Mammary Gland Disorders
A female of childbearing age with absence of the breasts, an individual with galactorrhea sufficient to require the use of absorbent pads, and a male with painful gynecomastia that interferes with performance of activities of daily living each would have 0% to 5% impairment of the whole person. If there were a coexisting psychiatric impairment, the whole person impairment would be greater (see Chapter 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders).

--break--
10.10 Metabolic Bone Disease
Metabolic bone disease usually does not result in impairment unless there is fracture, pain, deformity, or peripheral nerve entrapment. Hyperparathyroidism, hypogonadism, glucocorticoid excess, hyperthyroidism, nutritional deficiencies, and certain drugs may cause osteoporosis, which is reversible with treatment, and are discussed elsewhere, as are multiple myeloma and other malignancies. The treatment of renal osteodystrophy may be highly successful, but even after renal transplantation, bone disease may persist. In order to prevent progressive skeletal deterioration, continuous treatment may be required for primary osteoporosis, hypogonadism, Paget’s disease, and vitamin D-resistant osteomalacia. Permanent deformity may result from rickets, osteoporotic fractures, and osteogenesis imperfecta.

--break--
10.10 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Metabolic bone disease is usually asymptomatic unless complications occur, such as fractures, accompanied by pain.

--break--
10.10b Description of Clinical Studies These include, but are not limited to (1) dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA); (2) biochemical markers such as alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin, and collagen cross-links; (3) urinary calcium excretion; (4) radiographs and bone scans; and (5) bone biopsy.
-- chars 3031 --
--break--
10.10
c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Metabolic Bone Disease
Unless accompanied by pain, skeletal deformity, or peripheral nerve involvement, 0% impairment exists since activities of daily living are not affected. When continuous hormone and mineral therapy gives complete relief of symptoms, impairment of the whole person may be considered to be 0% to 3%. When continuous therapy is required to relieve pain and the activities of daily living are restricted, the estimate should be 5% to 15% impairment of the whole person.

Impairment from fracture, spinal collapse, or other complications of metabolic bone disease is discussed in the chapters on the musculoskeletal system (Chapters 15-17) and pain (Chapter 18). In general, the impairment percents shown in the Guides chapters make allowance for the pain that may accompany the impairing conditions. Any associated loss of motion should be evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in the chapters on the musculoskeletal system.

--break--
3. Marble A, Krall LP, Bradley RF, Christlieb AR, Soeldner JS, eds. Joslin’s Diabetes Mellitus. 12th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Lea & Febiger; 1985.
--break--
4.
Levin ME, O’Neal LW, eds. The Diabetic Foot. 3rd ed. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1983.
--break--
5.
Davidson JK, ed. Clinical Diabetes Mellitus: A Problem-Oriented Approach. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Thieme Medical Publishers; 1991.
--break--
6. Braverman LE, Utiger RD, eds. Werner and Ingbar’s The Thyroid. 6th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: JB Lippincott Co; 1991.

--break--
7. Burger HG, McLachlan RI, eds. Gonadal Disorders. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; December 1998.
--break--
8. Service JF, McMahon MM, O’Brien PC, Ballard DJ. Functioning insulinoma—incidence, recurrence and long-term survival of patients: a 60-year study. Mayo Clin Proc. 1991;66:711-719.
--break--
9. Orth DN. Cushing’s syndrome: review article. N Engl J Med. 1995;332:791-803.
--break--
10. Bravo EL. Evolving concepts in the pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment of pheochromocytoma. Endocrinol Rev. 1994;15:356-367.
--break--
11. Silverberg SJ, Bilezikian JP. Evaluation and management of primary hyperparathyroidism. J Clin Endocr Metab. 1996;81:2036-2040.
--break--
12. Watts NB, ed. Osteoporosis. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; June 1998;419-439.

================================================================================
Chapter 11:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Ear, Nose,  Throat, and Related Structures
11.1 Principles of Assessment
11.2 The Ear
11.3 The Face
11.4 The Nose, Throat, and Related Structures
11.5 Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures Impairment Evaluation Summary
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairments resulting from principal dysfunction of the ear, nose, throat, and related structures. Assess permanent impairment ratings of these structures by evaluating losses in structure or the following functions: hearing; equilibrium; respiration; mastication, olfaction, and taste; speech
-- chars 3165 --
and voice; and the effect of these losses on the ability to perform activities of daily living. Impairment criteria, listed in earlier editions of the Guides,
were adapted from the American Academy of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery.1 Abbreviations and their definitions are listed in the Glossary.

The following sections have been revised for the fifth edition: a new section has been added on the evaluation of voice impairment, facial disorders and disfigurements have been combined, and case examples have been added to the impairment classes.
--break--
11.1 Principles of Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluations.

Assistive devices must not be used during the determination of a hearing impairment rating. The use of such devices might give a false impression of a subject’s sensitivity and distort the need to take hearing conservation or other indicated measures. As stated in Chapter 1, report measured hearing with and without an assistive device. However, only the measurement without the assistive device should be used to determine the impairment rating.

--break--
11.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Begin the evaluation with an inquiry into specific symptoms and their severity, duration, and manner of onset. The history, physical examination, and diagnostic studies may enable identification of the diagnosis, a management plan, and prognosis. Since the ear, nose, throat, and related structures have distinct functions, disorders of each system will be covered separately in this chapter. Permanent impairments of each system with nonoverlapping functional losses are evaluated separately and then combined.

Some impairment classes refer to limitations in the ability to perform daily activities. When this information is subjective and possibly misinterpreted, it should not serve as the sole criterion upon which decisions about impairment are made. Rather, obtain objective data about the severity of the findings and the limitations and integrate the findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent impairment.

--break--
11.1 b Description of Clinical Studies Multiple and diverse tests are used to investigate the ear, nose, throat, and related structures. Some of these tests are discussed in the relevant organ system section and summarized in Table 11-10.

--break--
11.2 The Ear
The ear consists of the auricle, the external canal, the tympanic membrane, the ossicles, the middle ear, the eustachian tube, the mastoid, and the internal ear.
The auditory and vestibular systems include the ear and central nervous system pathways.

The ear provides sensorineural input critical to the senses of hearing and balance. Hearing enables contact with environmental cues (eg, those that alert) and enables us to communicate socially. Balance contributes to maintenance of equilibrium in relation to the environment. Balance function is mediated by dynamically monitoring information about the position of the head, eyes, trunk, and joints at rest and with activity. Although hearing and balance disturbances can be objectively measured, other conditions, such as chronic otorrhea, otalgia, and tinnitus,2 are subjective, should be noted, but cannot be measured independently of the individual’s self-reports.
-- chars 3588 --

Permanent hearing impairment is a permanently reduced hearing sensitivity, outside the range of normal for the individual or based on population normal values.3 Hearing should be evaluated after maximum rehabilitation has been achieved and when the impairment is no longer accelerating beyond an ageappropriate rate.4 Evaluate hearing impairment based upon the individual’s binaural hearing, determined from the pure-tone audiogram.

--break--
11.2 a Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Hearing Loss
Criteria for evaluating hearing impairment are established through hearing threshold testing, which serves as the most reproducible of the measures of hearing. Therefore, estimate an impairment percentage based on the severity of the hearing loss, which accounts for changes in the ability to perform activities of daily living. Tinnitus in the presence of unilateral or bilateral hearing impairment may impair speech discrimination. Therefore, add up to 5% for tinnitus in the presence of measurable hearing loss if the tinnitus impacts the ability to perform activities of daily living.

In the calculation of a hearing impairment rating, no correction for presbycusis should be made because:
(1) the method below calculates the degree of hearing and assigns a rating, regardless of cause (eg, age, injury, or noise exposure); (2) age correction would result in a reduced binaural impairment score that would thus underestimate the true magnitude of the hearing impairment; and (3) estimation of the relative contributions of various causes of binaural hearing impairment is a clinical process (apportionment or allocation) that is separate from the calculation of binaural hearing impairment.

Hearing impairment is measured by evaluating hearing in each ear separately and both ears together, based on audiometric measurements. Hearing impairment is reported in each ear separately and both ears together.

Audiometric Measurements to Determine Hearing Impairment
In determining impairments, the following steps should be taken.
--break--
1. Test each ear separately with a pure-tone audiometer and record the hearing levels at 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 Hz. It is necessary that the hearing level for each frequency be determined in every subject. The following rules apply for extreme values:
a. If the hearing level at a given frequency is greater than 100 dB or is beyond the range of the audiometer, the level should be taken as 100 dB.
b. If the hearing level for a given frequency has a negative value (eg, –5 dB), the level should be taken as 0 dB.
--break--
2. Add the four hearing levels (dB) for each ear separately. Hearing levels are determined according to ANSI Standard S3.6-1996.4
--break--
3. Consult Table 11-1 to determine the percentages of monaural hearing impairment for each ear.
--break--
4. Consult Table 11-2 to convert the monaural hearing impairment percentages to a binaural hearing impairment rating.
--break--
5. Consult Table 11-3 to determine the impairment of the whole person.
-- chars 3018 --

†Decibel sum of the hearing threshold levels at 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 Hz.

Evaluation of Monaural Hearing Impairment If the average of the hearing levels at 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 Hz is 25 dB or less, according to 1996 American National Standards Institute (ANSI) audiometric standards,4 no impairment rating is assigned since there is no change in the ability to hear everyday sounds under everyday listening conditions (Table 11-1). At the other extreme, if the average of the hearing levels at 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 Hz is more than 91.7 dB, the binaural hearing impairment rating is 100% since the individual has lost the ability to perform an activity of daily living—the ability to hear everyday speech.1

The data from which this formula1 was developed indicate that the ability to hear everyday sounds under everyday listening conditions is not impaired when the average of the hearing levels at 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 Hz is 25 dB or less. The 25-dB “fence” represents this finding; it is not a compensatory adjustment for presbycusis, the hearing loss that occurs with age.

This method of evaluating hearing impairment should be applied only to adults who have acquired language skills. Evidence suggests that language acquisition by children who do not have language skills may be delayed when the average hearing level is in the range of 15 to 25 dB.

According to the above standards for monaural hearing impairment, for every decibel that the average hearing level or loss for speech exceeds 25 dB, 1.5% of monaural impairment is assigned. Thus, with an average hearing level loss of 67 dB above 25 dB, monaural impairment is 100% (Table 11-1).

Evaluation of Binaural Hearing Impairment Hearing impairment of both ears, referred to as binaural impairment, indicates a loss of hearing of greater than 25 dB in both ears at frequencies of 500, 1000, 2000, and/or 3000 Hz.

Binaural impairment is determined by the following formula:

naural hearing impairment (%) = [5 x (% hearing impairment better ear)
+ (% hearing impairment poorer ear)] 6
To calculate binaural impairment when only one ear exhibits hearing impairment, use the above formula, allowing 0% impairment for the unimpaired ear (the ear with the better hearing).

Alternatively, use Table 11-2, which is derived from the formula given above, to calculate the value for binaural hearing impairment. Then apply the value for binaural hearing impairment to Table 11-3, which converts binaural hearing impairment to impairment of the whole person.

--break--
11.2 b Equilibrium
Equilibrium, or orientation in space, is maintained by the visual, kinesthetic, and vestibular mechanisms.
When impairments of equilibrium are predominantly due to or have effects on other organ systems, the impairment should be evaluated in the relevant organ system, eg, disorders of the nervous system (Chapter 13), cardiovascular system (Chapters 3 and 4), and visual system (Chapter 12).

Disturbances of equilibrium may be classified as follows: (1) vertigo, a sensation of rotation of the subject or of objects about the subject in any plane;
-- chars 3116 --
(2) giddiness or lightheadedness, distinguished from vertigo by the absence of feelings of movement2; and
(3) abnormalities of postural stability and/or standing balance with or without vertigo. Vertigo may be produced by disorders of the vestibular mechanism and its central nervous system components, including the cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and brain stem, and by eye movements.

Permanent impairment may result from any disorder causing vertigo or disorientation in space. Three regulatory systems—vestibular, ocular (visual), and kinesthetic (proprioceptive)—are related to the vestibulo-ocular reflex. The evaluation of impairments of equilibrium may include consideration of one or more of these mechanisms.5,6 This chapter addresses only disturbances in equilibrium due to vestibular disorders.

Clinical evaluations may include electronystagmography,2 caloric irrigation, positional and rotatory tests, dynamic posturography, Romberg and tandem Romberg tests, and radiological brain imaging studies. The results of these laboratory tests should be correlated with validated clinical measures of balance and ambulation to determine the true state of equilibratory dysfunction. For other causes of disequilibrium, see the relevant chapter, such as the neurologic system (Chapter 13), for central nervous system disorders.

Vestibular System
Permanent impairment can result from defects of the vestibular (labyrinthine) mechanism and its central connections. The defects are evidenced by loss of equilibrium produced by disturbance or loss of vestibular function.

Complete loss of vestibular function may be unilateral or bilateral. When the loss is unilateral, adequate central nervous system compensation may or may not occur. With total bilateral loss of vestibular function, equilibrium is totally dependent on the kinesthetic and visual systems, which usually are unable to compensate fully for movement or ambulation.
Depending on the ability to perform activities of daily living, the percentage of permanent impairment of the whole person may range from 0% to 95%.

Disturbances of vestibular function are evidenced by vertigo (vestibular dysequilibrium) as defined above. Lightheadedness and abnormalities of gait not associated with vertigo are not defined here as being disturbances of vestibular function.

Vertigo may be accompanied by varying degrees of nausea, vomiting, headache, immobility, ataxia, and nystagmus. Movement may increase the vertigo and the accompanying signs and symptoms. Peripheral vestibular (labyrinthine) disorders are often associated with hearing loss and tinnitus. Vestibular disorders may result in temporary or permanent impairments. Evaluation of vestibular impairment should be performed when the condition is stable and maximum adjustment has been achieved, which generally is considered to occur months after resolution of the disease or injury.5,6

The classification in Table 11-4 has been developed for evaluation of those individuals with permanent disturbances of the vestibular mechanism. The impairment ratings reflect the severity of the permanent impairment and the ability of the individual to perform activities of daily living. Since vestibular disorders are dynamic, assessment of permanent impairment should be based on determination of the person’s condition after it is stable. Although symptoms may be intermittent, the examiner needs to gauge functioning during episodes with exacerbations. Vestibular impairment as defined here is rated similarly in Chapter 13.
-- chars 3537 --

--break--
11.3  The Face
The face, its parts, and its structural components serve multiple functions: protection of underlying structures and organs (such as the eyes), portals of entry for deglutition and respiration, and communication through expression and speech.

The skin covers the body, acts as a physical barrier to underlying structures, provides sensory perception, regulates temperature and body fluids, and resists trauma. See Chapter 8 for primary skin impairments.

The portal for deglutition is the mouth and lips. Disturbances in function can result in drooling or inability to keep food or liquid in the mouth while eating. The lips and mouth also serve in vocal articulation, adding intelligibility to speech. The nose and mouth are the portals of entry for respiration.
Impairment may be a result of neurologic disorders, such as partial or complete paralysis of the lips; scar formation and contracture of the lips; or loss of tissue.

The face plays a unique role in communication. No other part of the body serves as specific a function for personal identity and for the expression of thought and emotion. Facial expressions are an integral part of normal living postures. A degree of normalcy is needed for effective verbal and nonverbal communication. Facial anatomy contributes to identity, expression, and normal functioning, and to the appearance of the forehead and cheeks; eyes, eyelids, and eyebrows; lips and mouth; nose; and chin and neck. The face is such a prominent feature that it plays a critical role in the individual’s physical, psychological, and emotional makeup. Facial disfigurement can affect all of these components and can result in social and vocational handicaps and even psychiatric impairment.
--break--
11.3
a Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Facial Disorders and/or Disfigurement To evaluate permanent impairment due to a disorder or disfigurement of the face, consider changes in anatomy and function and the effect of the impairment on the ability to perform activities of daily living. This section deals with permanent impairment as it relates mainly to the face’s structural integrity. For loss of function involving other aspects of the functioning of the face, refer to the specific organ system involved and combine the structural integrity loss with the relevant loss of function. Loss of structural integrity can result from cutaneous disfigurement, such as that due to abnormal pigmentation or scars, or from loss of supporting structures, such as soft tissue, bone, or cartilage of the facial skeleton. Other information on cutaneous disfigurement appears in Chapter 8 (The Skin).
Disfigurement of the face can result from many causes, particularly burns, traumatic injury, surgery, infections, or dysplasia. Effects on individuals can vary tremendously, as can remaining function. Total disfigurement of the face after treatment should be deemed a 16% to 50% impairment of the whole person, dependent also upon the degree of functional loss. For the assessment of psychosocial impairment due to disfigurement, refer to Chapter 14 on mental and behavioral disorders.
-- chars 3139 --

Facial disfigurement may be considered total if it is severe and grossly deforming of the face and features. Such disfigurement must involve at least the entire area between the brow line and the upper lip on both sides. Severe disfigurement above the brow line should be deemed to be, at a maximum, 1% impairment of the whole person. If disfigurement is severe below the upper lip, it may be deemed to be 8% impairment of the whole person. Specific, prominent facial disfigurements are estimated as shown in Table 11-5.

Comment: No loss of nasal function or nasal bone structural integrity. Appearance of nose did not change. Scar falls in skinfold line and is barely visible.

The functions of these structures, and the order in which they will be discussed, are as follows: (1) respiration, (2) mastication and deglutition, (3) olfaction and taste, and (4) speech. Permanent impairment may result from a deviation from normal in any of the above functions, and, because of their close relationship, more than one structure may be involved.

--break--
11.4a Respiration
Respiration may be defined as the act or function of breathing, that is, the act by which air is inspired and expired from the lungs. The respiratory mechanism includes the lungs and the air passages; the latter includes the nares, nasal cavities, mouth, pharynx, larynx, trachea, and bronchi.

In this chapter, discussion of permanent impairments related to respiration is limited to defects of the air passages. Refer to Chapter 5 on the respiratory system for a discussion of impairments of the lower airways and lung parenchyma.

The most commonly encountered defect of the air passages is obstruction, which may be partial, as with stenosis, or complete, as with occlusion.
Obstructions and other air passage defects are evidenced primarily by dyspnea or so-called unusual breathlessness. Sleep apnea, which is covered in Chapter 5, may be related to functional upper-airway obstruction.

Dyspnea is a cardinal factor that contributes to an individual’s diminished capacity to carry out activities of daily living and to permanent impairment.
This subjective complaint or symptom, which indicates an awareness of respiratory distress, usually is noted first and is most severe during exercise. When dyspnea occurs at rest, respiratory dysfunction probably is severe. Dyspnea may or may not be accompanied by related signs or symptoms.

Individuals with air passage defects may be evaluated in accordance with the classification in Table 11-6. Permanent impairments involving obstructive sleep apnea should be evaluated with the respiratory system criteria described in Chapter 5.

Note: Individuals with successful permanent tracheostomy or stoma should be rated at 25% impairment of the whole person.

--break--
11.4 b Mastication and Deglutition
The act of eating includes mastication and deglutition. Numerous conditions of nongastrointestinal origin, singly or in combination, may interfere with these functions.

Dysfunction of the temporomandibular joint may impede mastication, affect speech, cause lower facial deformity, and produce pain.7,8 In this section, the effect of temporomandibular joint dysfunction on eating is considered; other effects may be considered in conjunction with parts of the Guides that deal with the nervous system or pain.
-- chars 3337 --

In accordance with the philosophy of the Guides, when mastication and deglutition are evaluated, the ability to eat should be stable and maximal rehabilitation should have been achieved. When mastication or deglutition is impaired, the imposition of dietary restrictions usually results. Such restrictions are the most objective criteria by which to evaluate permanent impairment of these functions.9-14 The relationship of the restrictions to impairments of mastication and deglutition are shown in Table 11-7.

--break--
11.4c Olfaction and Taste
Only rarely does complete loss of the closely related senses of olfaction and taste seriously affect an individual’s performance of the usual activities of daily living. For this reason, a value of 1% to 5% impairment of the whole person is suggested for use in cases involving partial or complete bilateral loss of either sense due to peripheral lesions. This value is to be combined with any other impairment of the individual (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

--break--
11.4d Speech
In this chapter, speech is defined as the capacity to produce vocal signals that can be heard, understood, and sustained over a useful period of time. Speech ought to allow effective communication in the activities of daily living.

This chapter does not consider the causes and characteristics of abnormal speech. Rather, it considers how an impairment relates to the individual’s ability or efficiency in using speech to make himself or herself understood in activities of daily living. It is assumed that speech evaluation pertains to the production of voice and articulate speech and not to the language content or structure of the individual’s communication. On the basis of these assumptions, the primary problem is estimating proficiency in the use of oral language or measuring the utility of speech as defined above. This section also considers esophageal speech.

At this time there is no single, acceptable, proven test that will measure objectively the degrees of impairment due to the many varieties of speech disorders. Therefore, it is recommended that speech impairment be evaluated by examining the audibility, intelligibility, and functional efficiency of speech.
• Audibility is based on the ability to speak at a level sufficient to be heard.
• Intelligibility is based on the ability to articulate and to link phonetic units of speech with sufficient accuracy to be understood.
• Functional efficiency is based on the ability to produce a satisfactorily rapid rate of speaking and to sustain this rate over a useful period of time.

Other definable attributes of speech–such as voice quality, pitch, and melodic variation–are evaluated only when they affect one of the three primary characteristics noted above.

The classification chart, oral reading paragraph, and examining procedure used in estimating speech impairment are described below.

Classification Chart
Judgments as to the amount of impairment should be made with reference to the classes, percentages, and examples provided in the classification chart (Table 11-8). The 15 categories in the chart suggest
-- chars 3135 --
activities or situations with different levels of impairment. Data gathered from direct observation of the individual or from interviews should be compared with these categories, and values should be assigned on the basis of the specific impairments that are present.

Oral Reading Paragraph
The following paragraph, entitled “The Smith House,” is composed of 100 words and 10 sentences. It provides a uniform means of comparing a speech sample of the person being evaluated with the speech of normal speakers. The phonetic elements of the paragraph are selected particularly for their relevance to the intelligibility of the person’s speech.
The Smith House
Larry and Ruth Smith have been married nearly 14
years. They have a small place near Long Lake. Both of them think there’s nothing like the country for health. Their two boys would rather live here than any other place. Larry likes to keep some saddle horses close to the house. These make it easy to keep his sons amused. If they wish, the boys can go fishing along the shore. When it rains, they usually want to watch television. Ruth has a cherry tree on each side of the kitchen door. In June they enjoy the juice and jelly.

Examining Procedure
General Orientation
The examiner should have normal hearing as defined in the earlier section in this chapter on hearing. The setting of the examination should be a reasonably quiet room that approximates the noise levels of everyday living.

The examiner should base judgments of impairment on two kinds of evidence: (1) attention to and observation of the individual’s speech in the office—for example, during conversation, during the interview, and while reading and counting aloud—and (2) reports pertaining to the individual’s performance in everyday living situations. The reports or the evidence should be supplied by reliable observers who know the person well. The standard of evaluation is an average speaker’s performance in average situations of everyday living. It is assumed in this context that an average speaker can usually perform according to the following criteria:

• Talk in a loud voice when the occasion demands it.
• Sustain phonation for at least 10 seconds after one breath.
• Complete at least a 10-word sentence in one breath.
• Form all of the phonetic units of American speech and join them intelligibly.
• Maintain a speech rate of at least 75 to 100 words per minute and sustain a flow of speech for a reasonable length of time. A speech rate of 125 words per minute enables a speaker to read approximately one 81/2 x 11-inch page of double-spaced text in 2 minutes.

Specific Instructions
--break--
1. Place the individual approximately 8 ft from the examiner.
--break--
2. Interview the individual. This will permit observation of his or her speech in ordinary conversation while pertinent historical information is obtained.
--break--
3. Have the individual’s back toward the examiner and keep a separation of 8 ft between the examiner and the examinee. Instruct the person as follows: “You are to read this passage so I can hear you plainly. Be sure to speak so I can understand you.” Then ask him or her to read aloud the short paragraph, “The Smith House.”
-- chars 3205 --
--break--
4. If additional reading procedures are required, simple prose paragraphs from a magazine may be used. A person who cannot read may be
requested to give his or her name and address and name all the days of the week and months of the year. Additional evidence regarding the person’s rate of speech and ability to sustain it may be obtained by noting the time required to count to 100 by ones. Completion of this task in 60 to 75 seconds is accepted as normal.
--break--
5. Record judgment of the individual’s speech capacity with regard to each of the three rows of the classification chart (Table 11-8). The degree of impairment of speech is equivalent to the greatest percentage of impairment recorded in any one of the three rows of the classification chart.

For example, a person’s speech capacity is judged to be the following: audibility, 10% (class 1); intelligibility, 50% (class 3); and functional efficiency,
--break--
30% (class 2). The individual’s speech impairment is judged to be equivalent to the greatest impairment (50%). A speech impairment of 50% is judged to be an 18% impairment of the whole person, according to Table 11-9.

--break--
11.4e Voice
Voice, as the term is used in this section, refers to the production of audible sounds by the vibration of the true vocal folds of the larynx. Voice, or phonation, is therefore the generator of speech—the shaping of sounds into intelligible words. Alternative physiological sound generators, such as the false vocal folds or the esophagus, are not considered here.

This section does not consider the causes of voice disorders. Rather, it recognizes that voice disorders may present such definable symptoms as abnormal volume (voice fatigue, weakness, or low sound intensity), abnormal control (pitch and/or melodic variation), and/or abnormal quality (hoarseness, harshness, or breathiness). These symptoms indicate abnormal physiological functioning of the phonatory mechanism and may contribute to impairment of speech.

At this time, there is no single, acceptable, proven test that will measure objectively the degrees of impairment associated with the many varieties of voice disorders. Tests such as laryngoscopy, acoustical analysis of voice, strobovideolaryngoscopy, analysis of phonatory function, and laryngeal electromyography are recognized as appropriate and useful.15-17 The significance of current normative data is unclear when confined to consideration of impairment.

For voice and/or speech impairments, the classifications in Table 11-8 and Table 11-9 should be used. Note that the impairment ratings for speech and/or voice impairments are not evaluated separately. The degree of impairment of speech and/or voice is equivalent to the greatest percentage of impairment recorded in any one of the three sections (audibility, intelligibility, or functional efficiency) of the classification chart (Table 11-8).

United States to receive necessary voice care. Voice is now of a sufficient intensity for most everyday speech needs. However, because of her emotional distress, loss of her previous occupation as an international opera star, and change in activities of daily living, an impairment rating is warranted.
-- chars 3215 --

Comment: Class 2 on the basis of audibility and activities of daily living, not including work. Unhappy with his vocal progress. Totally disabled as a professional singer because of this work-related injury.

--break--
11.5 Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures Impairment Evaluation Summary

See Table 11-10 for an evaluation summary for the assessment of impairmnent of the ear, nose, throat, and related structures.

Table 11-10 continued

================================================================================
Chapter 12:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Visual System
12.1 Principles of Assessment
12.2 Impairment of Visual Acuity
12.3 Impairment of the Visual Field
12.4 Impairment of the Visual System
12.5 Visual Acuity Measurement at Near (Reading Acuity)
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairment of the visual system as it affects an individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living. The visual system consists of the eyes and supporting structures, the neural pathways, and the visual cortex of the brain. The visual system is unique in that it
combines the input from two separate eyes into a single visual perception.

This chapter focuses on functional impairment of the visual system as a whole. The impairment ratings in this chapter estimate the severity of the effects of certain types of vision loss on the ability to perform activities of daily living. Changes due to abnormalities in the optic nerve or visual cortex are also discussed in Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System.

This chapter has been significantly revised from the fourth edition of the Guides. The revision was based on a consensus within the international community of experts in low vision. Individuals interested in further discussion, including an emphasis on ability, can refer to the Guide for the Evaluation of Visual Impairment, published for the International Society for Low Vision Research and Rehabilitation.12 A summary of revisions follows.
--break--
1. The Visual Efficiency Scale that was used up to the fourth edition of the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment22, 23 was developed by Snell in 1925.19-21 This scale was replaced with the Functional Vision Score (FVS).17 The FVS provides an estimate of the effect of certain types of vision loss on the ability to perform activities of daily living. On this scale, 20/200 is rated as a 50% impairment.
--break--
2. The FVS is based on an assessment of visual acuity and visual field. The FVS allows for individual adjustments for other functional deficits, such as contrast and glare sensitivity, color vision, binocularity, stereopsis, suppression, and diplopia, if these deficits cause a significant ability loss that is not reflected in a visual acuity or visual field loss.
--break--
3. The extra scale and losses for diplopia and aphakia have been removed. Recommendations to make adjustments on an individual basis, if needed, have been added.
-- chars 3069 --
--break--
4. Near vision measurements are optional; the last section of this chapter contains a discussion on how to make the assessment of reading acuity more accurate.
--break--
5. Visual field is recalculated using a new Visual Field Score (VFS). To better account for the functional significance of losses in the two lower quadrants, the lower visual field carries 50% more weight than the upper field. Hemianopia is also scored more appropriately.
--break--
6. Visual impairment ratings are calculated using the formula (3 ? OU + OD + OS)/5 instead of the prior formula (3 ? better eye + 1 ? lesser eye)/4. The new formula better accounts for situations where the binocular function is not identical to the function of the better eye. This can be particularly important for dissimilar field losses.
--break--
7.
This edition also calculates a binocular impairment value for visual acuity and for field loss before combining these into an estimate of total visual loss and functional vision.
--break--
8. The impairment rating for the visual system = 100 – the FVS.

--break--
12.1  Principles of Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations.
The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

A permanent visual impairment is defined as a permanent loss of vision that remains after maximal medical improvement of the underlying medical condition has been reached. Ophthalmology has the capability to measure organ functions such as visual acuity and visual field rather precisely. Accordingly, this chapter uses a numerical assessment of visual functions to derive an estimate of their effect on functional vision (ie, on the ability to perform generic activities of daily living). The process is summarized in Table 12-1.

Note that the prefix visual is used when the score refers to each eye. The prefix functional refers to the estimated performance of the individual. The term vision score combines visual acuity and visual field estimates (and individual adjustments, if significant).

--break--
12.1 a Steps to Calculate the Visual Impairment Rating
--break--
1. Measure visual acuity. Use Table 12-2 to convert each of the measured acuity values to a Visual Acuity Score (VAS).
--break--
2. Use Table 12-3 to combine the acuity scores from each eye to determine a single Functional Acuity Score (FAS). Note: If the visual fields are normal and no individual corrections are made, the impairment rating for the visual system is equal to the acuity-related impairment rating (100 – FAS).
--break--
3. Measure the visual fields. Use Table 12-5 or the detailed instructions in Section 12.3c to convert each of the measured field values to a Visual Field Score (VFS).
--break--
4. Use Table 12-6 to combine the field scores from each eye to determine a single Functional Field Score (FFS).
-- chars 3064 --
--break--
5. Use the rules in Section 12.4 to combine the Functional Acuity Score and the Functional Field Score to determine a Functional Vision Score (FVS).
--break--
6.
Subtract the Functional Vision Score from 100 to obtain the impairment rating for the visual system.
--break--
7. If additional visual impairments are not reflected in the reduction of visual acuity or visual field, the examiner may make an adjustment as explained in Section 12.4. The need for such adjustment must be well documented.

The procedure as outlined in Table 12-1 reduces a complex reality to a single number. This number ignores individual differences in adjustment to vision loss. This approach can be helpful for administrative and legal purposes because it does not penalize the individual who has made a good adjustment with a reduction of the impairment rating. By the same token, this approach cannot be used for individualized rehabilitation plans. Such plans must be based on an ability profile detailing each of the various skills and abilities of the specific individual. As the rehabilitation proceeds, successful adaptations will reduce further rehabilitation needs. Thus, the ability profile may change while the generic impairment rating will remain the same.

--break--
12.1 b Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Subjective symptoms of vision loss usually are the result of objective changes in visual acuity and/or visual field.

Visual acuity describes the ability of the eye to perceive details. Visual acuity loss will manifest itself in an inability to perform detail-oriented tasks, such as reading and face recognition. A lay term for visual acuity loss is blurred vision. Visual acuity loss affects many activities of daily living. Although visual acuity is governed by only a small area of the retina (the fovea, the central-most area), it occupies a major part of the visual cortex.

Visual field refers to the ability to detect objects in the periphery of the visual environment. A lay term for peripheral field loss is tunnel vision. Visual field loss will manifest itself in an inability to detect peripheral objects and, often, in a reduced ability to avoid obstacles. The peripheral visual field occupies the largest part of the retina, but it occupies a smaller part of the visual cortex.

Good visual acuity and good visual field are both needed for the performance of daily living skills. A person with tunnel vision may not notice when someone enters the room. A person with visual acuity loss, on the other hand, may notice the newcomer but may have difficulty recognizing the person’s face. Once an object has been detected in peripheral vision, central vision will be used to recognize it. A person with a visual field defect (ie, tunnel vision) may not notice a sign on the road or on a wall but could read the sign once found, assuming the individual had good visual acuity. A person with normal visual fields but a visual acuity loss will detect the sign but will not be able to read it.
-- chars 3015 --

Another important function is contrast sensitivity. Whereas visual acuity is generally measured with small objects of high contrast, contrast sensitivity refers to the ability to detect larger objects of poor contrast. This ability is often needed for daily living skills. Facial characteristics are an example of typical low-contrast objects. Contrast sensitivity loss often accompanies visual acuity loss, but it can occur separately. Because measurement methods for contrast sensitivity are not standardized, this function is not included in the impairment ratings. Where indicated, contrast sensitivity loss that exceeds the effects of the visual acuity loss may be handled as an individual adjustment.

Other symptoms may result from deficits in glare sensitivity, color vision, night vision, binocularity, stereopsis, suppression, and diplopia. If these deficits cause a significant ability loss that is not reflected in a visual acuity or a visual field loss, they may also be handled as adjustments to the impairment rating.

--break--
12.1 c Description of Clinical Studies
To obtain the required information, the physician needs to perform a detailed visual assessment, including the cause, severity, and prognosis of the underlying disorder and the expected or documented effects of the vision loss on the ability to perform activities of daily living. Such a visual assessment includes the following.
• Medical history, with particular emphasis on preexisting conditions and treatments and on the major cause of the current vision loss.
• Current condition of the eyes and visual system, with documentation of relevant anatomic findings.
• Visual acuity measurement with best correction, binocularly and for each eye separately. Accurate measurement of distance visual acuity (letter chart acuity) is mandatory; measurement of near acuity (reading acuity) is optional.
• Visual field measurement for each eye.
• Other visual functions, such as contrast sensitivity or color vision, if considered relevant.
• Calculation of an initial impairment rating (visual ability estimate), as detailed in this chapter.
• Other factors that may affect the individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living.
• Discussion (with documentation) of factors that might justify an adjustment of the initial ability estimate and discussion of apportionment considerations, if relevant.

In addition to the equipment needed for a standard ophthalmologic evaluation, the following tools are required for the functional evaluation.
• Standardized letter chart. A lighted chart in a lighted room is preferred because it is more representative of normal viewing conditions than is a projector chart in a semidark room. Charts with five letters per line, proportional spacing, and a geometric progression of letter sizes are preferred.5-10 For vision in the normal and nearnormal ranges, testing at 6 m (20 ft) is recommended. For testing in the low-vision range, testing at 1 m is recommended (see Table 12-2). Test charts for this distance are commercially available.24
-- chars 3068 --

• Standardized reading tests. Such tests are optional. If performed, they should be standardized tests with continuous text segments as specified in the last section of this chapter. A geometric progression of letter sizes is preferred. Letter size designations should be in M-units24 because the implementation of point size and Jaeger numbers has been shown to be inconsistent from chart to chart.
• Visual field equipment. If a restriction of the visual field is claimed or suspected, formal visual field testing on standardized equipment is required. If no visual field restriction is claimed, a confrontation visual field is acceptable to confirm the absence of field restrictions.
• Other functional tests, such as a contrast sensitivity test or glare test, if problems in these areas are reported.
• Samples of actual job-related tasks, if these tasks are different from average reading tasks.

--break--
12.2 Impairment of Visual Acuity
--break--
12.2 a Visual Acuity Notations
Visual acuity is usually recorded as a fraction comparing the individual’s performance to a performance standard. If the individual needs letters that are twice as large or twice as close as those needed by a standard eye (ie, 2x angular magnification), the visual acuity is 1/2. If letters are needed that are five times larger or five times closer than those needed by a standard eye, the visual acuity is 1/5, etc. In the United States, it is customary to standardize the numerator at 20. Thus, a visual acuity of 1/2 is recorded as 20/40 and one of 1/5 is recorded as 20/100.

--break--
12.2 b Test Procedures
Visual acuity is usually measured with symbols (letters, numbers, pictures, or other symbols) presented in a letter chart format. Because visual acuity values can vary widely, the optimum testing distance is not the same for all groups.

--break--
12.2b.1 Testing in the Normal Range Individuals in the normal and near-normal range of vision (20/60 or better, ICD-9-CM2, Table 12-2) represent the majority of all patients. The traditional letter charts and projector charts were designed for this group. The most common testing distance is 6 m (20 ft) because at this distance the optical difference with infinity may be ignored. When a printed chart is used, the indicated visual acuity values are valid only if the individual is located at the distance for which the
chart was designed. If a projector chart is used, the individual must be located at the distance for which the projector was adjusted. Charts with a geometric progression of letter sizes, five letters on each row, and letter spacing that is equal to the letter size (often referred to as ETDRS-type charts) are the preferred standard.9, 10

The individual is placed at the distance for which the chart was designed and encouraged to read as far down as possible. The line is considered read when more than half of the characters (eg, three of five) are read correctly. Most charts will indicate the visual acuity level that corresponds to the ability to read each line. When visual acuity is measured in this way, the result should be recorded using the standard US notation (ie, 20/…). The individual should be tested with the best available refractive correction.
-- chars 3236 --

When testing for visual acuities around the 20/200 level (legal blindness), the choice of letter chart is particularly important because it affects the assignment of benefits. On traditional charts that have no lines between 20/100 and 20/200, the descriptor 20/200 or less becomes, effectively, less than 20/100, so individuals with 20/125 would be recorded as 20/200. On newer charts, 20/200 or less is more appropriately interpreted as less than 20/160. If only an older printed chart is available, the individual can be brought to 10 ft so that less than 20/160 can be interpreted as less than 10/80. The individual with 20/125 (10/63) is then reported appropriately as better than 20/200. Note that the term legal blindness is a misnomer because 90% of individuals who have 20/200 or less visual acuity are not blind. The term severe vision loss as used in ICD-9-CM should replace the term legal blindness.

--break--
12.2b.2 Testing in the Low-Vision Range Use of the Guides will often involve individuals whose visual acuity has dropped to less than 20/60 (ie, to the low-vision range in ICD-9-CM,2 Table 12-2). Individuals in the low-vision range form a
minority of the general population but may represent the majority of those for whom visual impairment evaluations are requested.

Traditional letter charts often have only a few letters for visual acuities worse than 20/100. Such charts are inadequate for the low-vision range and have promoted the use of vague statements such as “count fingers” and “hand motions.” More accurate results can be obtained by bringing the chart closer. Testing at 1 m is recommended because it can cover the entire low-vision range, down to 1/50 (20/1000).

When visual acuity is measured at 1 m, it should be recorded as a metric Snellen fraction in which the numerator records the test distance in meters (in this case 1 m, thus 1/…) and the denominator indicates the smallest letter size read in “M-units” (1 M = 1.45 mm = about 1/16 in). The standard US notation may be added in parentheses. Thus, the ability to read 8 M characters at 1 m should be recorded as 1/8 (20/160). Charts with a cord attached and labeled for 1-m testing are available commercially.24

--break--
12.2b.3 Correction for Refractive Error
The visual acuity without correction may be reported as part of the general eye examination. The impairment ratings should be based on the best-corrected visual acuity. It is important, therefore, to ensure that the refractive correction is appropriate for the testing distance. This is especially true for the short viewing distances used for low-vision individuals. If uncorrected and best-corrected visual acuity are the same, this should be stated explicitly.

--break--
12.2b.4 Monocular vs Binocular Acuity Because binocular viewing represents the most common viewing condition in daily life, the impairment rating should consider the best-corrected binocular visual acuity as well as the best-corrected acuity for each eye separately.
-- chars 3004 --

Under most circumstances, best-corrected visual acuity measured binocularly will be determined by the acuity of the better eye. There are exceptions, however. People with latent nystagmus may have better eye stability, and hence better acuity, when viewing binocularly than when one eye is occluded. Some people with diplopia or with distortions in one eye may see better when the poorer eye is occluded.

--break--
12.2b.5 Incomplete Data
Whenever possible, determination of an impairment rating should be based on direct examination of the individual. Occasionally, it may be necessary to determine a tentative impairment rating based on chart review, where complete data may not be available. If no better information is obtainable, use the following:
Interpret CF … ft
as
… /200. Interpret CF … m
as
… /60. Interpret HM … ft
as
… /1000. Interpret HM … m
as
… /300.
Therefore, CF 3 ft is interpreted as 3/200, and HM 5 ft is interpreted as 5/1000.

--break--
12.2b.6 Use of Realistic Conditions
The evaluation of visual functions should be based on performance under optimal conditions. An exception can be made, however, when the best possible conditions are not feasible in daily life. Examples include individuals who would see better with contact lenses but who cannot tolerate them; those with a large interocular difference in refractive error who cannot tolerate full correction of both eyes; and those who can achieve better acuity with an extremely high or extremely low illumination level that cannot be achieved under daily living conditions or in the workplace.

Under these and similar conditions, the evaluation should be based on measurements obtained under realistic daily living conditions. Document why testing under suboptimal conditions is most appropriate. When testing multihandicapped individuals, a distinction must be made between failure to see and failure to respond.

--break--
12.2 c Steps for Assigning a Visual Acuity–Based Impairment Rating
--break--
1. Assign a Visual Acuity Score for each eye. Measure visual acuity as outlined above. Use Table 12-2 to replace the visual acuity value with a score value.

The left part of Table 12-2 lists the ranges of visual acuity loss used in ICD-9-CM.2 At the top of the scale are those with normal vision (20/20 or better), and at the bottom are those who are blind (no light perception). In between are those who have lost part of their vision. This group is said to have low vision (the word vision indicates that they are not blind; the word low indicates that they have less than normal vision). The visual acuity values follow a geometric progression—each line differs from the adjacent lines by a fixed ratio (25%, 10 steps = 10x).

The central part of Table 12-2 lists impairment ratings. This conversion is based on Weber-Fechner’s law, which states that a proportional increase in the stimulus corresponds to a linear increase in sensation. The Visual Acuity Score (VAS) has fixed increments (5 points) based on counting 1 point for each letter read on a standard acuity chart with 5 letters per line. The VAS is an ability scale on which higher values indicate better function. The impairment rating, which is a scale of ability loss, is obtained by subtracting the VAS from 100. Note that the VAS extends beyond 100 (as does normal visual acuity), but that ability loss is counted only when visual acuity is less than 20/20.
-- chars 3415 --

The right part of Table 12-2 lists the estimated impact of visual acuity loss on reading ability. These ranges are based on a general ability scale with the following gradations.17

h reserve capacity 80 ± 10
Mild loss
Normal function, but
(near-normal)
loss of reserve

d for some aids 40 ± 10
Severe loss
Restricted function,
slower than normal, even with aids
--break--
20 ± 10
Profound loss
Restricted function,
marginal performance, even with aids
--break--
0 ± 10
(Near-) total loss  Cannot perform;
needs substitution skills

The three parts of Table 12-2 fit well with each other. This confirms that the VAS is a reasonable estimate of acuity-related visual abilities and that the impairment rating is a reasonable estimate of acuity-related performance loss. If no visual acuity data were obtainable, the right side of Table 12-2 might be used to obtain a very rough impairment estimate.

--break--
2. Combine the acuity values.
After the best-corrected visual acuity values for binocular vision (OU), for the right eye (OD), and for the left eye (OS) have been obtained and converted to Visual Acuity Scores, these values need to be combined to a single Functional Acuity Score (FAS). The FAS provides an estimate of the ability of the person to perform acuity-dependent daily living tasks. This is done using Table 12-3.

Note that VAS and FAS may differ. For example, an individual with one blind eye will have a 0 VAS for that eye. However, if the other eye is normal, the FAS will be near-normal, indicating normal performance but loss of reserves (see Examples 12-2 and 12-14).

The acuity-related impairment rating (IR) is calculated by subtracting the FAS from 100. Note that the FAS can be larger than 100 but that the impairment rating is truncated at 0.

--break--
3. Consider reading acuity (optional). Determination of reading acuity (near vision) is optional and is explained in more detail in the last section of this chapter. Reading acuity is typically determined binocularly, but it may be determined monocularly if this gives better results.

If reading acuity is significantly worse than letter acuity, the functional acuity score may be adjusted to the average of the letter chart (or distance) acuity score and the reading (or near) acuity score. The probable reason for the discrepancy should be explored and explained.

Note: The visual acuity values used in this table follow a strict geometric progression. For clinical use, values such as 20/32 and 20/63 may be rounded to 20/30 and 20/60.

--break--
12.2d Calculation Examples for Visual Acuity Loss
Note: In the following examples it is assumed that the visual acuity loss is the only deficit. Visual fields and other visual functions are presumed to be normal.

--break--
12.3 Impairment of the Visual Field
--break--
12.3a Test Procedures
If no visual field impairment is claimed or suspected (impairment rating = 0), a confrontation visual field may be used to confirm a normal field. In all other circumstances (impairment rating > 0), formal visual field tests should be performed by qualified personnel according to the instructions provided with the equipment.
-- chars 3157 --

--break--
12.3a.1 Confrontation Visual Field
This method uses only the examiner’s hands. Seated in front of the individual, the examiner moves his or her hands from the periphery inward to test for the peripheral field limits. This method is an acceptable way to confirm a normal visual field in individuals in whom no field loss is claimed, but it is too gross for detailed evaluation if a field loss is claimed or suspected.

--break--
12.3a.2 Tangent Screen Testing
This method uses a black screen on which variously sized objects may be moved. This method is difficult to standardize and loses accuracy beyond 45°. It
is not acceptable for the accurate assessment of permanent impairment.

--break--
12.3a.3 Goldmann-Type Testing
The Goldmann visual field equipment provided the first standardized measurement technique. Testing is done in a bowl so that all testing distances are equal while the background and stimulus luminances can be controlled tightly. The usual mode of testing is known as kinetic perimetry because a test stimulus of constant size and intensity is moved by an operator.

The test results are plotted as isopters, contour lines that outline the areas where stimuli of various intensity can be perceived. The functional implications of certain isopter patterns are relatively easy to interpret. Agencies, such as the Social Security Administration, often require testing of the Goldmann III4e isopter for eligibility determinations.

--break--
12.3a.4 Automated Perimetry
In recent decades, there has been a move from manual to automated perimetry. (Commonly used equipment includes Humphrey, Octopus, Dicon, and other brands.) This has been accompanied by a move to static perimetry. In static perimetry, the presentations are limited to various fixed locations where stimulus size and intensity are varied.

Automated perimetry results are commonly plotted as a gray scale. Such reports are better suited for automated statistical analysis. They are less intuitive for human interpretation with regard to functional vision. Most clinical tests are limited to the central 30° because this is the most important area for medical diagnostic purposes. For the functional assessment of visual field loss, however, testing to 60° or beyond is mandatory.

--break--
12.3a.5 Binocular Fields
Considering both monocular and binocular function is even more important for a functional assessment of the field of vision than it is for visual acuity because intact field areas in one eye may compensate for field loss in the other eye. In cases of asymmetric field loss, the binocular field of view may be substantially better than the field of view of either eye alone.

Direct testing of the binocular visual field presents problems, however, because the amount of convergence in a bowl perimeter cannot be monitored and fixation monitoring devices will not work when the head, rather than the eye, is centered. Therefore, the fields of each eye should be measured separately, and a binocular field plot should be derived from the superimposition of the two monocular field plots.
-- chars 3100 --

--break--
12.3a.6 Tests Used
When Goldmann equipment is used, the III4e isopter should be plotted. If only a larger isopter is available, this isopter may be used (this may result in an underestimation of the field loss). If only smaller isopters are available, the test cannot be used for impairment evaluation.

If automated equipment is used, a pseudoisopter equivalent to the Goldmann III4e isopter should be constructed (see Example 12-9). On the Humphrey equipment, this would be the isopter for a 10-dB stimulus. Plots of the central 30° may only be used when the remaining field radius is smaller than 20° and confrontation testing indicates no further peripheral vision.

--break--
12.3b The Visual Field Score (VFS)
The Visual Field Score (VFS), which is the basis for the calculation of visual field–based impairment ratings, parallels the Visual Acuity Score (VAS). The VAS can be determined by counting the letters read correctly on a standardized visual acuity chart.
Similarly, the VFS can be determined by counting the points seen on a standardized visual field grid. The combination rules are also similar.

--break--
12.3b.1 Testing Grid
The testing grid is constructed by drawing 10 meridians: 2 in each of the upper quadrants and 3 in each of the lower quadrants. The optimal positions for the 10 meridians are as follows: 25°, 65° (upper right), 115°, 155° (upper left), 195°, 225°, 255° (lower left),
--break--
285°, 315°, and 345° (lower right). Along these meridians, 5 points (spaced 2° apart) are assigned to the central 10° and 5 points (spaced 10° apart) are assigned to the periphery beyond 10°; thus, a 60° radius will represent 10 points. The nasal and superior meridians may not reach 60°, but the lateral field will extend further. Thus, the average normal field will score about 100 points.

Figure 12-1 summarizes the point assignments. The circle represents a 10° radius.

This arrangement has the following effects:
• The visual field score for the central 10° is 50 points. This reflects that the central 10° of the visual field correspond to 50% of the primary visual cortex. This also maintains the traditional assumption that a visual field loss to a 10° radius is equally disabling as a visual acuity loss to 20/200.
• Choosing the measured meridians within the quadrants rather than along the horizontal and vertical meridians avoids the need for special rules for hemianopias.
• A complete homonymous hemianopia receives a 50-point score. This implies that it is considered equally disabling as a field restriction to a 10° radius or as a visual acuity loss to 20/200.
• Choosing 3 meridians in the lower quadrants and 2 in the upper ones acknowledges the functional importance of the lower field by giving it 50% extra weight.
• ICD-9-CM defines severe, profound, and neartotal visual field loss as concentric restriction to a 10°, 5°, and 2.5° field radius.2 These categories fit the VFS scale.

The VFS is summarized in Table 12-5, which is similar to Table 12-2 in organization.
-- chars 3028 --

Use Table 12-5 or the detailed rules in Section 12.3c to determine a Visual Field Score for each eye.
Proceed to Table 12-6 to combine the scores from each eye to determine a single Functional Field Score.

--break--
12.3c Assigning a Field-Based Impairment Rating
Calculation of a visual field–based impairment rating requires the following steps.

--break--
1. Determine the extent of the visual field for each eye. If Goldmann visual field plots are available, determine the III4e isopter for each eye. If only automated visual field plots are available, determine a pseudoisopter by drawing a line surrounding all points with a sensitivity of 10 dB or better, excluding points with < 10-dB sensitivity. If automated field plots are used, these should be full-field plots (Humphrey 60-2 or the equivalent). The 30° plot may be used only if confrontation testing has determined that there are no peripheral islands of vision and if a 30° central field plot (Humphrey 30-2 or the equivalent) shows that there is no vision beyond 20°.
--break--
2.
Determine the Visual Field Score for each eye. Use the pattern explained in Figure 12-1. This pattern can be implemented in several ways, explained below.

--break--
2.a. Paper and pencil
Starting with a visual field plot of the III4e isopter (or the equivalent), draw 10 meridians, 2 in each upper quadrant and 3 in each lower quadrant. To space the meridians evenly, use the following approximate positions: 25°, 65° (upper right), 115°,
--break--
155° (upper left), 195°, 225°, 255° (lower left), 285°,
--break--
315°, and 345° (lower right).

Determine the extent of each meridian. Within 10° from fixation, round to the nearest 2° value; outside 10° round to the nearest 10° value. Convert the rounded extent to a subscore using Table 12-8.

If a scotoma interrupts the meridian, round the extent of the scotoma to the nearest 2° or 10° value and subtract the corresponding point value. In the presence of scotomata, use of the overlay grid is the preferred method.

Add the 10 subscores to obtain the VFS for that eye. The average normal field will score about 100 points.

--break--
2.b. Overlay grid
Create an overlay grid with 10 meridians (see step 2.a) and grid points on each meridian at 1°, 3°, 5°, 7°, 9°, 15°, 25°, 35°, 45°, 55°, and 65°. Place the
overlay grid over the field plot. Count the grid points enclosed by the III4e isopter (or the equivalent). Grid points within scotomata should not be counted. The total number of points seen is the Visual Field Score (VFS).

--break--
2.c. Automated calculation
A pilot study in 1992 conducted with a Humphrey Field Analyzer and controlled by an IBM-PC has shown the feasibility of a fully automated test sequence using the points of the overlay grid as stimulus positions.16 Such a program is not yet available commercially.

--break--
3. Determine the Functional Field Score (FFS). Determine the binocular field by superimposing the monocular fields. For the binocular field, points are counted as seen if seen by both eyes or by one of the eyes. This determines the binocular VFS.
-- chars 3097 --

Combine the Visual Field Scores for OU, OD, and OS (see Table 12-6):
--break--
12.3
d Calculation Examples for Visual Field Loss
The following examples calculate the Visual Field Score for a single eye. This calculation needs to be followed by the same calculation for the other eye and for the binocular field (see Examples12-10 and
--break--
12-11). Finally, use Table 12-6 to combine these values to determine a Functional Field Score.

Method 2: Create an overlay grid (see instructions in Section 12.3c).
Count the points within the III4e isopter. The diagram has 100 solid dots within the 60° circle and 8 open dots outside. The score is easily counted as: 100 – solid dots missed (symbol ?) + open dots seen (symbol heavy ). For this field plot: FFS = 100 – 4 + 4 = 100.
Comment: The Visual Field Score is 100; therefore, the impairment rating is 0%. Note that the extra points seen laterally compensate for the points missed nasally and superiorly.

--break--
12.3e Calculating the Binocular Field Existing perimeters are not equipped to provide reliable measurements of the binocular visual field.
Therefore, the binocular visual field is constructed by superimposing the two monocular plots. On the superimposed plot, areas seen by either eye are counted as seen; only areas not seen by either eye are counted as defects. The resulting binocular score can vary dramatically, depending on the location of the defects.

--break--
12.4 Impairment of the Visual System
The preceding calculations have provided us with two separate impairment estimates. The FAS provides an estimate for visual acuity–related abilities, such as reading, while the FFS provides an estimate for visual field–related abilities, such as orientation and mobility. To obtain an overall estimate of visual impairment, the two impairment estimates must be combined to a single Functional Vision Score (FVS). Subtracting the FVS from 100 then provides the visual impairment rating for the visual system.
See below (Section 12.4c, Table 12-10) for the whole person impairment rating.

Because the calculations outlined so far consider only the visual acuity and visual field aspects of vision, there must be room for individual adjustments in cases where functional vision is limited by factors other than visual acuity and visual field. The procedure was summarized in Table 12-1.

--break--
12.4a Calculating an Impairment Rating for the Visual System
The FAS and the FFS were calculated as weighted averages. This is appropriate because a good visual acuity or good visual field in one eye can compensate for loss of the same function in the other eye. Visual acuity–related functions and visual field–related functions, however, are largely independent. Good visual acuity cannot compensate for a loss of visual field, and vice versa. Therefore, the FAS and the FFS are combined using a multiplication formula.

--break--
12.4a.1 Basic Rule
To calculate the FVS, the FAS and the FFS are multiplied as if they represented percentage scores:
-- chars 3023 --
FVS = (FAS ? FFS)/100
For example, if the FAS is 80 (a 20% impairment) and the FFS is 75 (a 25% impairment), the FVS is calculated as: 80% ? 75% = 60% (a 40% impairment).

Note that this calculation can be performed only on the basis of the residual ability scores. Adding or multiplying the impairment ratings (which indicate ability loss) gives erroneous answers.

--break--
12.4a.2 Additional Rules
Some additional rules are needed to avoid unrealistic calculations.
--break--
1. For the purpose of this calculation, Functional Acuity and Functional Field Scores that are > 100 are treated as if they were 100. Thus, losses are counted only if the performance drops below the performance standard. The average performance of healthy eyes often is better than the performance standard. This better performance is taken into account in calculating the Functional Scores (see Example 12-2), but it is not counted as a reduction of the impairment rating.
--break--
2. If visual field data are not available and if there is no clinical reason to suspect visual field loss, the FFS may be assumed to be 100. In this case, the FVS is the same as the FAS, and the impairment rating for the visual system is the same as the impairment rating for the visual acuity loss.

--break--
12.4a.3 Rule for Central Scotomata (Field Loss and Acuity Loss Are Not Independent) The dense array of points in the central 10° area of the visual field grid means that paracentral scotomata (blind spots adjacent to the point of fixation) will be counted even if they do not affect the central acuity. This is appropriate because it has been shown that such scotomata can interfere significantly with reading ability and with other activities of daily living.

However, if the scotoma is central (ie, it covers the point of fixation), it affects both visual acuity and visual field and the two impairment ratings can no longer be treated as independent. Using the basic formula, central scotomata would be counted twice: once through their effect on visual acuity and once through their effect on the central field. Therefore, an additional rule is needed.

--break--
3. If visual acuity is reduced, some central visual field losses will not be counted, as specified in Table 12-9.

Thus, for every 10 points of VAS loss, field losses in one ring of 10 grid points are ignored. This means that these points are counted as if they were seen.
This adjustment is made for each eye separately. The effect of this rule is that individuals with a small island of good acuity within a pericentral scotoma will get credit for this scotoma, but that those with a central scotoma that affects visual acuity will not get double benefits. The adjustment does not affect peripheral field losses. Thus, a person with peripheral field loss due to glaucoma who also develops a

central loss due to macular degeneration will get credit for the central loss as well as for the peripheral field loss (see Examples 12-13, 12-14, and 12-15).

-- chars 3008 --
--break--
12.4b Individual Adjustments
Although visual acuity loss and visual field loss represent significant aspects of visual impairment, they are not the only factors that can lead to a loss of functional vision. This edition of the Guides does not provide detailed scales for other functions, such as:

• Contrast sensitivity. This is the ability to perceive larger objects of poor contrast. Loss of this ability can interfere significantly with many activities of daily living. It is often, but not always, associated with a loss of visual acuity.
• Glare sensitivity (veiling glare), delayed glare recovery, photophobia (light sensitivity), and reduced or delayed light and dark adaptation. These are other functions that may interfere with proper contrast perception.
• Color vision defects. These defects are not uncommon but usually do not interfere significantly with generic activities of daily living. Severe color vision defects (achromatopsia) are usually accompanied by visual acuity loss. In some vocational settings the impact of minor color vision deficiencies can be significant. This could be a case where the generic impairment rating does not reflect the job-specific employability rating.
• Binocularity, stereopsis, suppression, and diplopia. These functions vary in their effect on activities of daily living. Their significance often depends on the environment and on vocational demands.

Standardized measurement techniques on which standardized ability estimates can be based have not yet been developed for most of these functions.
Furthermore, their effect may be partially accounted for by a loss of visual acuity and may vary significantly according to environmental demands.

If significant factors remain that affect functional vision and that are not accounted for through visual acuity or visual field loss, a further adjustment of the impairment rating of the visual system may be in order. The need for the adjustment, however, must be well documented. The adjustment should be limited to an increase in the impairment rating of the visual system (reduction of the FVS) by, at most, 15 points.

The same rule should be observed as in the case of central scotomata: Deficits should only be counted to the extent that their effect exceeds the effect of the related visual acuity or visual field deficit. Note the following examples.
--break--
1. An individual with a congenital dark adaptation deficit with normal acuity and normal fields may be given a limited impairment rating based on this deficit. In someone with rod dystrophy (RP) manifested by field loss as well as dark adaptation problems, the impairment rating will be determined by the field loss and no additional rating is given for the dark adaptation deficit.
--break--
2. Most people with visual acuity loss due to macular degeneration also have a loss of contrast sensitivity. Because the impairment rating is dominated by the visual acuity loss, no additional rating is given for the contrast sensitivity loss. Occasionally, individuals will have a bothersome contrast sensitivity loss while the visual acuity is still normal. In these cases, a limited impairment rating may be given based on the contrast sensitivity loss.
-- chars 3220 --
--break--
3. Minor color vision deficits exist in about 5% of males. These deficits do not interfere with generic activities of daily living and do not receive an impairment rating. A printer with such a deficit would have no problems with black-and-white printing, but he or she may have difficulty judging the accuracy of color prints. This is a deficit that affects employability in a specific job, but it does not enter into the generic impairment considerations in this chapter (see Chapters 1 and 2). Total color blindness (achromatopsia) is extremely rare. It is accompanied by visual acuity loss, in which case the visual acuity loss will determine the impairment rating.

--break--
12.4c Impairment of the Whole Person In classes 1, 2, and 3, individuals may benefit from vision enhancement techniques such as large print,
better illumination, and better contrast. In classes 4, 5, and 6, a shift to vision substitution techniques occurs; this may include talking books, Braille, long cane, etc. Because of these techniques, a totally blind person is not totally incapacitated. In the previous section, a downward adjustment of the Functional Vision Score of up to 15 points was allowed for additional impairments whose effect exceeds that of the visual acuity and/or visual field loss. A similar, but opposite, adjustment may be made in classes 4, 5, and 6 to account for the effects of vision substitution skills that alleviate the effects of the permanent vision loss.

This adjustment affects the translation of the impairment rating of the visual system to an impairment rating of the whole person as shown in Table 12-10. Since the effectiveness of vision substitution skills will vary from person to person and cannot be predicted from the visual acuity and visual field measurements, the adjustments in Table 12-10 are generalized estimates.

That the whole person impairment rating is not reduced further, even for blind persons who have made very effective adjustments, reflects the fact that vision substitution skills alleviate the effects of vision loss but do not eliminate the vision loss itself.

--break--
12.4 d Calculation Examples Combining Visual Acuity Loss and Visual Field Loss

Diagnosis: History of retinoblastoma.
Impairment Rating: 100 – 84 = 16% impairment of the visual system, which is also the impairment of the whole person (see Table 12-10).
Comment: The loss of one eye reduces the Functional Vision Score to the near-normal range, indicating a significant loss of reserves but not a significant restriction of the ability to perform activities of daily living.
Note: To simplify the presentation of the following cases, the assumption is made that both eyes have identical conditions so that the Functional Acuity and Field Scores equal the Visual Acuity and Field Scores of the eye that is discussed. In real cases there usually will be differences in the scores.

--break--
12.5 Visual Acuity Measurement at Near (Reading Acuity)
Consideration of reading acuity in the calculation of the FAS is optional. It is warranted only if the reading acuity is significantly different from the distance acuity. In that case, it is appropriate to use the average of the FAS for letter chart acuity and the FAS for reading as indicated in Table 12-11. This section contains instructions for accurate reading acuity measurement.
-- chars 3363 --

--break--
12.5 a Near Acuity vs Distance Acuity (Reading Acuity vs Letter Chart Acuity) Near acuity may be measured with a reduced-size letter chart or with continuous text. When the objective is the assessment of functional vision—as is the purpose of the Guides—continuous textual reading material should be used.

Under most circumstances, letter chart acuity and reading acuity—if measured appropriately and with the proper refractive correction—will be similar.
If significant differences between reading acuity and letter chart acuity exist, measurement errors,
inappropriate refractive correction, and/or other complicating factors should first be suspected. The nature of these factors needs to be explored, documented, and corrected where possible. Accurate calculation of the reading acuity requires accurate measurement of the letter size as well as the viewing distance. Many practitioners record only the letter size read and not the reading distance. Table 12-11 shows that this is inappropriate because small changes in the reading distance can result in significant changes in visual acuity, especially if the reading distance is short.

One cause of a true discrepancy between reading acuity and letter chart acuity might be that the individual uses a small central island within a ring scotoma for letter acuity while using a larger, more eccentric area for reading. Another cause might be that when measuring letter chart acuity, people are usually pushed for threshold or marginal performance, whereas reading tests more often aim at a level of comfortable performance. For this reason, the magnification requirement for reading acuity may be somewhat greater than that for letter acuity. The difference is known as the magnification reserve needed for reading fluency.

--break--
12.5b Letter Size Notations
Another reason for discrepancies can be found in the use of inaccurate letter size notations. The commonly used Jaeger numbers refer to the labels on the boxes in the printing house in Vienna where Jaeger selected his print samples. They have no numerical value, and their implementation on various reading cards is notoriously variable. The J-numbers listed in Table 12-11 present the range of J-designations found for each letter size when a number of reading cards were surveyed.

Some charts use a notation in printer’s points. Point sizes have a numerical value but may vary depending on the type style used. Many reading cards list distance equivalents. This notation is valid only if the card is used at the distance for which the card was designed. At any other distance, the use of distance equivalents is utterly confusing.

The only letter size unit that allows a comparison between letter chart acuity and reading acuity is the M-unit. M-units refer directly to the actual letter size (X-height for uppercase letters on a letter chart, xheight for lowercase letters in a reading segment).
One M-unit subtends 5 minutes of arc at 1 m and equals 1.454 mm (10% less than 1/16 in).
-- chars 3020 --

--break--
12.5c Measurement Guidelines for Reading Acuity (Near-Vision Acuity) Visual acuity measurement at near is more complex than visual acuity measurement at distance because
both letter size and viewing distance can vary. When reading acuity is measured, follow these guidelines.
If binocular reading is possible, the binocular reading acuity should be recorded. If binocular reading is not possible or not preferred, the reading acuity of the eye that is preferred for actual reading should be

--break--
1/16 in. Measuring the letter size in units of 1/16 in overestimates the visual acuity by slightly less than half a standard step size.

To test reading acuity for the normal and near-normal range, many cards are available. Most will indicate distance equivalents. Note that these distance equivalents are valid only if the designated distance is used.

Many individuals undergoing impairment evaluation will fall in the low-vision range. They may require shorter reading distances and/or larger print sizes.
Table 12-11 shows the proper visual acuity values and impairment ratings for many combinations of letter size and viewing distance.

--break--
12.5d Modified Snellen Formula
The visual acuity values found in Table 12-11 could be calculated using the standard Snellen fraction V = m/M, in which the viewing distance is specified in meters (1 m = 100 cm = 40 in, 1 in = 2.5 cm) and the letter size is in M-units. Use of the standard Snellen fraction becomes awkward when the viewing distance (in meters) is itself a fraction. In this case, it is more convenient to use the reciprocal of the viewing distance, which is known as the diopter (2 diopters = 1/2 m, 5 D = 1/5 m, etc). The use of reciprocal values turns the Snellen fraction into a multiplication, which is more easily calculated in one’s head because it uses whole numbers instead of fractions within fractions.

The traditional formula

used.

The measurement of reading acuity requires a reading card with calibrated reading segments. Cards with proportionally spaced segments of equal length are preferred. The preferred step size is the same as for letter charts. The viewing distance should be measured and recorded carefully. Measurement with a diopter ruler simplifies calculations (see Section 12.5d) and provides a direct comparison to the required accommodation or reading add. Letter size specification in M-units is mandatory if any calculations or comparisons are involved. One M-unit equals 1.454 mm, which is slightly smaller than

where M = letter size in M-units, m = viewing distance in meters, and D = viewing distance in diopters.

--break--
12.5e Instructions
To find the optimal combination of reading distance and letter size, start at the reading distance that corresponds to the individual’s current reading add and/or accommodative power. Increase the reading add (reduce the reading distance) to reach smaller print. Using Table 12-11, find the visual acuity at the intersection of the letter size row and the reading distance column. Alternatively, using the M ? D formula and a diopter ruler, calculate the 1/V value.
-- chars 3128 --

For each combination of viewing distance and letter size read, compare the reading add to the viewing distance in diopters to verify the appropriate refractive correction. Also, compare the M ? D value to verify that the visual acuity values are consistent.

--break--
12.5f Correction of Refractive Error
To verify that the refractive correction is appropriate for the viewing distance, it is often useful to ask the individual to move the card back and forth to find the best possible focus. If the refractive correction (reading add) is not optimal, the measured acuity will not be the best-corrected visual acuity. Measuring the reading distance in diopters has the advantage of easy comparison to the reading addition.

================================================================================
Chapter 13:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
13.1 Principles of Assessment
13.2 Criteria for Rating Impairments Due to Central Nervous System Disorders
13.3 Criteria for Rating Cerebral Impairments
13.4 Criteria for Rating Impairments of the Cranial Nerves
13.5 Criteria for Rating Impairments of Station, Gait, and Movement Disorders
13.6 Criteria for Rating Impairments of Upper Extremities Related to Central Impairment
13.7 Criteria for Rating Spinal Cord and Related Impairments
13.8 Criteria for Rating Impairments Related to Chronic Pain
13.9 Criteria for Rating Impairments of the Peripheral Nervous System, Neuromuscular Junction, and Muscular System
13.10 Nervous System Impairment Evaluation Summary
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairments due to documented dysfunction of the brain, cranial nerves, spinal cord, nerve roots, and/or peripheral nerves and muscles.

The following revisions have been made for the fifth edition: (1) an impairment evaluation summary is provided at the end of the chapter to allow easy access to the neurologic impairment in question; (2) a description of ancillary tests with some of their indications provides an understanding of abnormalities found on the neurologic examination; (3) there is more guidance in the assessment of cognition, gait and movement disorders, and cranial nerve disorders; and (4) additional cases are included to illustrate each area of impairment.

--break--
13.1 Principles of Assessment
This chapter emphasizes the deficits or impairments that may be identified during a neurologic evaluation.
For some nervous system impairments listed, hand dominance is critical to determine the degree of impairment. To evaluate distal nerve traumatic injury, refer to Chapter 16, The Upper Extremities. Because neurologic impairments are intimately related to mental and emotional processes and their functioning, the examiner should also understand Chapters 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders, and 18, Pain (pain has been accounted for in neurologic-based impairment ratings). Additional impairments based on those chapters may need to be considered.
-- chars 3070 --

Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluations.

A permanent neurologic impairment is any anatomic, physiological, or functional abnormality or loss that remains after maximum medical improvement (MMI). Impairment rating criteria for neurologic impairments include an assessment of the ability
to perform activities of daily living, as listed in Table 1-2. These limitations may involve physical performance (eg, walking, climbing, lifting, finger dexterity) or mental performance (eg, cognition
or communication).

If impairments involve several nervous system areas (eg, the brain, spinal cord, and/or peripheral nerves), calculate separate whole person impairment ratings for each area and combine them using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604). As discussed in the following text, impairment of the brain is assessed differently. Because brain dysfunction will likely affect many overlapping functions, identify the most severe cerebral impairment. The impairment rating is based on the neurologic condition that causes the most severe impairment. Examples are provided later in the chapter.

--break--
13.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Nervous system disorders can present with generalized or focal symptoms. Symptoms may include alterations in level of consciousness, confusion, memory loss, difficulties with language, headache, visual blurring, double vision, fatigue, facial pain and weakness, ringing in the ears, dizziness, vertigo, difficulty swallowing or speaking, weakness of one or multiple limbs, difficulty walking or climbing

stairs, shooting pain, numbness and tingling in the extremities, tremor, loss of coordination, loss of bladder or rectal control, and sexual dysfunction. Note that many of these symptoms describe the functional impairment experienced by the individual. The neurologic evaluation and ancillary clinical testing determine the origin of these symptoms. Difficulty walking, for example, may result from problems in different areas of the central and/or peripheral nervous system. The neurologic examination may find a spastic paraparesis associated with a spinal cord lesion. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine may show the etiology to be demyelinating plaques that also may show abnormal somatosensory evoked response since the pathway travels through the areas of demyelination in the spinal cord.

Some impairment classes refer directly to limitations in the ability to perform activities of daily living because of symptoms. When this information is subjective and open to misinterpretation, it should not serve as the sole criterion upon which decisions about impairment are made. Rather, obtain objective data about the severity of the findings and the limitations and integrate those findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent impairment.
-- chars 3140 --

--break--
13.1b Description of Clinical Studies:
A detailed neurologic examination enables the physician to identify the location of nervous system impairment. The purpose of ancillary testing is to assess the severity and location of the lesion and confirm the underlying pathology. It is important to remember that an abnormality found on ancillary testing (anatomic or physiologic) is an impairment but is not necessarily assigned an impairment rating if functions needed for activities of daily living are not affected. The nervous system is able to compensate for a variety of lesions due to its plasticity and redundancy, sometimes resulting in limited representation on the neurologic examination.

Common clinical studies for the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) include those described below.

Neuropsychologic assessment can characterize cognitive and behavioral alterations and therefore is useful in the clinical assessment and planning of patient management. The results of this assessment must be interpreted in the context of clinical and other test information. Many factors affect neuropsychological performance—age, education, socioeconomic status, and cultural background—and they must therefore be

considered for their influence on test results. Neuropsychological tests may be able to distinguish between abnormal and normal performance but cannot determine the cause of the problem. In other words, neuropsychological testing cannot demonstrate consistent diagnostic validity. Traumatic brain injury, for example, may have a profile similar to that of other forms of dementia.

Lumbar puncture (spinal tap) is a procedure by which cerebrospinal fluid is removed through a medium-sized needle, usually at the L3-4 interspace, in order to examine the presence of cells, proteins, glucose, or infection. This test may be performed when evaluating peripheral nerve disease. Other indications are infections of the nervous system and, sometimes, multiple sclerosis.

An electroencephalogram (EEG) records the spontaneous electrical activity generated by the cerebral cortex and is useful for recording the site and type of electrical discharge associated with seizure activity. Remember that a large percentage of cortical spikes are not recorded because they arise from deeper structures and there is significant attenuation by the cerebrospinal fluid and dura. Therefore, a seizure disorder is not necessarily accompanied by an abnormal EEG. Also, many diseases and metabolic abnormalities produce nonspecific EEG abnormalities.
The EEG may be normal when the neurologic examination is clearly abnormal since many areas of the brain are inaccessible to the recording electrodes and the EEG is time specific, ie, normal between discharges.

Evoked potentials are able to record components of response in the nervous system following multiple somatosensory, visual, and auditory stimuli. The integrity of these afferent pathways is evaluated. These studies may be used in the clinical evaluation of multiple sclerosis, optic neuritis, and acoustic neuroma.
-- chars 3090 --
Also, a variety of neurotoxins (eg, solvents, heavy metals) may produce alterations in the evoked potentials.

Carotid duplex examination includes Doppler flow velocity of different areas in the carotid artery and, thus, estimates the severity of stenosis in the carotid artery. It is performed in the evaluation of cerebrovascular disease.

Computed tomographic (CT) scan shows the anatomy of the brain, spinal cord, skull, and vertebral column. X-ray beams are used to differentiate densities of bone-calcified tissue, gray matter, white matter, cerebrospinal fluid, and air. Intravenous

contrast demonstrates areas where the blood-brain barrier is disrupted. CT scans are not ideal for examination of soft tissue but are better used to detect fresh hemorrhage or bone lesions.

CT myelogram uses a CT scan, after contrast material is injected into the dural sac, to show alterations in the anatomy between the dural sac and the structures that surround it. Since this is an invasive technique,
it may be used for diagnostic aid or preoperative planning.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) uses a powerful magnetic field to align the protons of the tissue that are excited by a radio frequency, subsequently forming an image from the different intensities of radio waves emitted from the different tissues. T1weighted images show soft tissue anatomy, while T2-weighted images demonstrate edema and cerebrospinal fluid. Contrast agents enhance lesions
when there is disruption in the blood-brain barrier. A variety of MRI techniques enhance the ability to see different types of pathology.

Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) allows vessel visualization with images of different intensities that reflect velocity and flow patterns. Basically, visualization of vessels reflects physical differences between moving and stationary protons.

Positron emission tomography (PET) allows examination of cerebral function by tomographic images.
Because of the complexity, cost, and limitation of isotopes with short half-lives, most studies at present are limited to research protocols, although clinical studies are available to document, in some individuals, the presence of Parkinson’s disease in its early stages.

Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) assesses brain perfusion by use of tracers. Since there is a strong relationship between local metabolism and blood flow, SPECT provides indirect information about metabolism. Therefore, it may show abnormalities in dementia and neurodegenerative diseases.

The peripheral nervous system can be evaluated by means of the following tests.

Nerve conduction and needle electromyography (EMG) studies help to determine which nerves are involved and their anatomic location. Also evident will be whether sensory, motor, or both fibers are predominantly involved and whether axonal degeneration, deymelination, or a combination of both is

present. Skillful differentiation of peripheral neuropathy and neuromuscular disorders may also be possible. Expert neuromuscular knowledge and understanding of pathologic manifestations of disease processes are necessary for the appropriate application and performance of these tests, particularly the EMG. These tests are objective and require minimal cooperation from the individual being tested. They reflect pathology in the largest, fastestconducting nerve fibers. The interpretation of these tests must be correlated with a detailed neurologic evaluation.
-- chars 3462 --

Quantitative sensory tests are portable tests, easily conducted in the clinician’s office, that provide a quantitative assessment of sensation. The integrity of large myelinated fibers is monitored with vibration threshold. Warm and cold temperature thresholds assess medium myelinated and unmyelinated fibers not reflected in nerve conduction studies. Since these are psychophysical tests, the cooperation of the individual being tested is required to process information from cutaneous receptors and provide the appropriate response. These tests can provide information about nerve fibers not examined by nerve conduction studies.

Autonomic function assessment is performed when cardiovascular, thermoregulatory, sphincter, and/or sexual dysfunction is believed to be caused by dysautonomia. For example, postural hypotension tests would include measuring heart rate and blood pressure response to the Valsalva maneuver and heart rate response to deep breathing, postural change, and stress. The integrity of both the central and efferent autonomic pathways is examined with these studies. Sweating abnormalities can be documented by warming the individual and then applying a powder that changes color when wet.

--break--
13.2 Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Central Nervous System Disorders
The central nervous system (CNS) consists of the brain and spinal cord. When injury or illness affects the CNS, several areas of function may be impaired. Therefore, the most severe category of impairment is based on the neurologic evaluation and relevant clinical investigations in four categories: (1) state of consciousness and level of awareness, whether

permanent or episodic; (2) mental status evaluation and integrative functioning; (3) use and understanding of language; and (4) influence of behavior and mood. The motor and sensory systems, gait, and coordination are evaluated once the four categories of cerebral impairment have been determined.

The most severe of these four categories should be used to determine a cerebral impairment rating.

Step 1. The initial step in assessing cerebral function is to determine whether disturbance is present in the level of consciousness or awareness. This may be a permanent alteration or an intermittent alteration in consciousness, awareness, or arousal. See Table 13-2 (Criteria for Rating Impairment of Consciousness and Awareness); Table 13-3 (Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Episodic Loss of Consciousness or Awareness); and Table 13-4 (Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Sleep and Arousal Disorders).
Step 2. Evaluate mental status and highest integrative functioning (see Table 13-6, Criteria for Rating Impairment Related to Mental Status).
Step 3. Identify any difficulty with understanding and use of language (see Table 13-7, Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Aphasia or Dysphasia).
Step 4. Evaluate any emotional or behavioral disturbances, such as depression, that can modify cerebral function (see Table 13-8, Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Emotional or Behavioral Disorders).
-- chars 3071 --
Step 5. Identify the most severe cerebral impairment listed above. Combine the most severe impairment from catagories 1 through 4 with any or multiple distinct neurologic impairments listed in Table 13-1 using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

--break--
13.3 Criteria for Rating Cerebral Impairments
--break--
13.3a Disturbances in Level of Consciousness and/or Awareness Individuals experiencing disturbances in consciousness may be suffering from a range of symptoms from episodes of altered awareness to being in a persistent vegetative state or an unresponsive coma.
These conditions are evaluated based on clinical findings on the neurologic examination and ancillary testing such as CT scan, MRI, SPECT, EEG, evoked potentials, and vestibular testing. The examination and tests will provide the extent of the underlying pathology and help examiners form a prognosis for patient management.

These neurologic disturbances may result in global loss of consciousness, responsiveness, or focal or lateral neurologic impairments. Table 13-2 lists criteria for determining permanent impairment ratings in individuals with these conditions, considering the severity of their condition and their ability to perform activities of daily living. For a class 1 rating, the individual is expected to perform activities of daily living (ADL) independently but may need assistance with activities that require fine motor dexterity (eg, buttoning). Class 2 impairment, in which individuals are moderately limited in ability to perform ADL, indicates the preservation of some independence but a need for assistance with transfers, bathing, and activities that require fine motor skills. Impairment classes 3 and 4 are assigned to individuals who require assistance in performing all ADL; different levels of participation by the individual differentiate the level of care required in the two classes.

--break--
13.3b Episodic Neurologic Impairments The Guides rates episodic neurologic impairments that are persistent and permanent. Episodic conditions involve syncope or loss of awareness, convulsive disorders, and arousal and sleep disorders.
Episodic indicates more than one occurrence. When these conditions originate from a problem in the nervous system, they should be evaluated according to the guidelines given in this chapter. For similar manifestations that originate in other body systems (eg, cardiovascular, respiratory) and secondarily affect the central nervous system, see the chapter(s) for the originating body system(s).

In assessing permanent impairment due to episodic conditions, first ensure that the individual’s condition has reached MMI and is unlikely to change significantly. Document the pattern of occurrence, estimate the effect of the condition on the individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living, and evaluate the effects of appropriate treatment. Record results from appropriate physiologic evaluations (eg, ECG, cardiologic evaluations, EEG) to document the disorder’s severity and provide information about prognosis.
-- chars 3063 --

Describe episodic disorders according to their onset, frequency, duration, and effect on performance of daily activities. Document and describe the results of seizure control. Daytime loss of consciousness with tonic or clonic seizures, nocturnal episodes with daytime residua, or brief lapses of awareness/communication from minor seizures may interfere significantly with daily activities. Minor seizures with alterations of awareness or consciousness, transient manifestations of unconventional behavior, or interruptions of daytime activity can result in an inability to perform activities of daily living.
Impairment ratings for major or minor seizures are calculated on the basis of how they affect the ability to perform activities of daily living.

The same criteria apply to impairments related to transient loss of awareness or consciousness (syncope, dizziness) after a period of cerebral ischemia that may be due to various mechanisms, including orthostasis, reflex actions, or cardiopulmonary disorders. Examiners may need to refer to other Guides chapters to estimate the magnitude of impairments related to cardiovascular disorders.

The criteria for evaluating episodic loss of consciousness or awareness are given in Table 13-3.

--break--
13.3c Arousal and Sleep Disorders
Arousal and sleep disorders include disorders related to initiating and maintaining sleep or inability to sleep; excessive somnolence, including sleep-induced respiratory impairment; and sleep-wake schedules.

Impairment categories that may arise from sleep disorders relate to (1) the nervous system, with reduced daytime attention, concentration, and other cognitive abilities; (2) mental and behavioral factors, including depression, irritability, interpersonal difficulties, and

social problems; (3) the cardiovascular system, with systemic and pulmonary hypertension, cardiac enlargement, congestive heart failure, or arrhythmias; and (4) the hematopoietic system. The Respiratory System (Chapter 5) also discusses impairment as it relates to obstructive sleep apnea.

Neurologic disorders associated with increased daytime sleepiness include central sleep apnea syndrome, narcolepsy, idiopathic hypersomnia, periodic limb movement disorder, restless leg syndrome, depression, brain tumors, posttraumatic hypersomnolence, multiple sclerosis, encephalitis and postencephalopathy, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, multiple system atrophy, and neuromuscular disorders with sleep apnea. It is expected that the diagnosis of excessive daytime sleepiness has been supported by formal studies in a sleep laboratory.

The clinician can evaluate sleepiness with the Epworth Sleepiness Scale,2 which assesses the likelihood of dozing (never = 0 to high chance = 3) in different situations: sitting and reading, watching television, sitting in a public place, riding as a passenger for an hour, taking an afternoon nap, sitting and talking to someone, sitting after a nonalcohol lunch, and stopped in traffic in a car. A score of 10/24 is equal to excessive sleepiness, or class 2 impairment. This scale correlates with the multiple sleep latency test (MSLT), which supports pathologic sleep in narcolepsy and idiopathic hypersomnia. See Table 13-4 for impairment due to sleep and arousal disorders.
-- chars 3296 --

--break--
13.3d Mental Status, Cognition, and Highest Integrative Function
Mental status and integrative function deficits include the general effects of organic brain syndrome; dementia; and some specific, focal, and neurologic deficiencies. Mental status tests are used to screen and follow individuals, frequently with repeated testing. They usually cover measures of orientation, attention, immediate recall, calculations, abstraction, construction, information, and recall. Frequently used mental status tests that cover these domains include the 6-item, short Blessed Test,3 the Neurobehavioral Cognitive Status Examination (NCSE),4 and the
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE).5 These screening tests can identify severely impaired individuals and are used to determine whether further evaluation with neuropsychological testing is needed.

Neuropsychological test battery covers many functional domains—attention, language, memory, visuospatial skills, executive function, intelligence, motor speed, and educational achievement—using tests with established validity and reliability. Individuals with severe cognitive impairments that have been identified on mental status tests will usually not benefit from neuropsychological evaluation. It is the person with subtle cognitive changes who benefits from neuropsychological testing. Neurologic disorders that have different behavioral ramifications amenable to neuropsychological evaluation include traumatic brain injury, dementia, Parkinson’s disease, human immunodeficiency virus, encephalopathy, multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, neurotoxic exposure, chronic pain, and personality assessment in individuals with neurologic disease.

The criteria for evaluating mental status and cognitive impairment are based on the amount of interference with the ability to perform activities of daily living.
This information can be obtained from someone who has close and continual contact with the individual and can be documented using any one of numerous ADL indices that determine changes in activities of daily living (eg, Barthel ADL Index6 and Blessed Dementia Scale7). A tool that combines both cognitive skills and function is the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR),8-10 which covers memory, orientation, judgment and problem solving, home and hobbies, community affairs, and personal care. This validated clinical assessment tool is reproduced in Table 13-5 to serve as an example of how to evaluate cognitive change in light of ADL impairment. One of the standardized mental status tests—the short Blessed, NCSE, or MMSE—can be used in conjunction with the CDR to rate the impairment. To use the CDR, score the individual’s cognitive function for each category (M, O, JPS CA, HH, and PC) independently.
The maximum CDR score is 3. Memory is considered the primary category; the other categories are secondary. If at least three secondary categories are given the same numeric score as memory, then CDR = M. If three or more secondary categories are given a score greater or less than the memory score, CDR = the score of the majority of secondary categories unless three secondary categories are scored on one side of M and two secondary categories are scored on the other side of M. In this case, CDR = M. Adapted from 8
-- chars 3275 --

Corresponding impairment ratings for CDR scores are listed in Table 13-6. A CDR score of 0.5 = class 1 impairment, CDR score of 1 = class 2, CDR score of 2 = class 3, and CDR score of 3 = class 4.

Source: Morris JC. The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR): current version and scoring rules [see comment]. Neurology. 1993;43(11):2412-2414. Reprinted with permission.

--break--
13.3e Communication Impairments: Dysphasia and Aphasia
Communication involves comprehension, understanding, language, and effective interaction between and among individuals. Aphasia is a condition in which language function is defective or absent. It includes a lack of comprehension with deficits in vision, hearing, and language (both spoken and written), and also the inability to implement discernible and appropriate language symbols by voice, action, writing, or pantomime. Dysphasia is a language impairment that is less severe than aphasia (which literally means “no speech”) but still is associated with a lesion in the dominant parietal lobe. It presents as a communication problem due to receptive or expressive dysphasia or a combination of the two.
Inability to have a meaningful conversation because no nouns are used is an example of dysphasia. Other common errors include errors of grammatical structure, word-finding difficulties, and word substitution. Dysphasia and aphasia are different from dysarthria, which is imperfect articulation of speech due to disordered muscle control. Dysphonia is an impairment of sound production that causes difficulty speaking and understanding. Speech and communication impairments due to nonneurologic primary problems are discussed in Chapter 11, Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures.

Dysphasia is the most common diagnosis, since most individuals usually retain some ability to communicate. An inability to understand language has a poorer prognosis than an inability to express language. Speech therapy is of little value in the absence of comprehension; therefore, compensatory techniques may not be learned when a receptive aphasia or dysphasia exists. Tests for dysphasia should be conducted after it is established how confused or disoriented the individual is and which side of the brain is dominant for speech. Cognition should also be evaluated after dysphasia mechanisms have been excluded.

Aphasia and dysphasia test batteries are frequently devised by the clinician and cover the following simple tasks: (1) listening to spontaneous speech or responses to simple questions; (2) pointing commands and questions that can be answered “yes” or “no” to test comprehension; (3) repeating words and phrases; (4) naming objects that have highand lowfrequency use; (5) reading comprehension and reading aloud (reading is related to educational achievement, which must be known before interpreting reading comprehension and reading aloud results); and (6) writing and spelling.12 If comprehension is relatively intact, the aphasia screening battery may be adequate to place an individual in class 1 or
-- chars 3042 --
--break--
2. However, individuals with dysphasia may score poorly on aphasia and dysphasia test batteries
while they demonstrate communicative competency for activities of daily living. This communicative competency may be measured by means of the Communicative Abilities in Daily Living (CADL),13 in which nonverbal communication is assessed.
Table 13-7 describes the criteria for rating impairment due to aphasia or dysphasia.

--break--
13.3f Emotional or Behavioral Impairments
Emotional, mood, and behavioral disturbances illustrate the relationship between neurology and psychiatry. Emotional disturbances originating in verifiable neurologic impairments (eg, stroke, head injury) are assessed using the criteria in this chapter. Psychiatric features may also exist with primary neurologic disorders. Psychiatric features can range from irritability to outbursts of rage or panic and from aggression to withdrawal. Neurologic impairments producing psychiatric conditions are assessed using the neurologic examination, with an expanded neuropsychiatric history and the necessary ancillary tests.
Psychiatric impairments may include depression, manic states, emotional fluctuations, socially unacceptable behavior, involuntary laughing or crying, impulsivity, general disinhibition with obsessive and scatological behaviors, and other kinds of CNS responses.

Psychiatric manifestations and impairments that do not have documented neurologic impairments are evaluated using the criteria in the chapter on mental and behavioral impairments (See Table 13-8 and Chapter 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders).

The remainder of this chapter covers the impairments listed in Table 13-1. The following impairments are combined with the most severe category of cerebral impairment described previously. If no cerebral impairment exists, the following impairments can stand alone or be combined with each other using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

--break--
13.4 Criteria for Rating Impairments of the Cranial Nerves
--break--
13.4a Cranial Nerve I—the Olfactory Nerve
The olfactory nerve is responsible for the sense of smell and odor recognition. It is located on the floor of the skull’s frontal fossa and is only occasionally impaired from trauma or other mechanism. Lack of sense of smell may reduce taste perception, which is mediated by cranial nerves VII and IX. Partial or complete right or left dysosmia or anosmia, or a perversion of the sense of smell, parosmia, may occur. Combine the estimate for anosmia or parosmia (given only if the anosmia interferes significantly with daily activities) with any other permanent impairment to determine the whole person impairment. The Smell Identification TestTM15 is a quantitative test for smell with an extensive normative database. The maximum impairment from anosmia is 3%.

--break--
13.4b Cranial Nerve II—the Optic Nerve The optic nerves carry visual information from the eyes to the visual cortex of the brain. Loss of visual input can have a profound influence on the ability to perform ADL. Impairment ratings for vision loss are discussed in general in this chapter and in more detail in Chapter 12 (The Visual System).
-- chars 3186 --

The optic nerve is one neural component of the visual system. The other components include the retina; the optic chiasm, which is unique in that only half of the nerve fibers cross to the contralateral side; the optic tracts; optic radiation; and visual cortex.
This section discusses vision loss due to prechiasmal lesions, such as optic nerve dysfunction (eg, optic neuritis), as well as postchiasmal vision loss due to cortical lesions (eg, hemianopia).

General Principles of Vision Assessment (see Chapter 12 for more detail)
Tables 13-9 and 13-10 in this section and the tables in Chapter 12 have been significantly revised from previous editions to reflect the effect of vision changes on the ability to perform ADL as listed in

Table 1-2. When assessing vision, the ratings for visual acuity loss and visual field loss are combined to a global visual impairment rating as summarized in Table 12-1. Since vision in one eye still enables one to perform most ADL, binocular vision is weighted more heavily than monocular vision. Thus, vision loss in one eye will receive a much lower impairment rating than vision loss in both eyes.
As discussed in detail in Chapter 12, evaluation of near-vision is optional and visual acuity loss to 20/200 receives a 50% impairment rating (see Tables 12-2,
--break--
12-3, and 12-4). Visual field loss is sampled in 10 meridians, two in each superior quadrant, three in each inferior quadrant (Figure 12-1). Thus, a homonymous upper quadrantanopia will receive an impairment rating of about 20%; an inferior quadrantanopia will be rated at about 30%; a homonymous hemianopia, at about 50% (Tables 12-5, 12-6, and 12-7).

The whole person impairment rating results from the visual acuity impairment rating and the visual field impairment rating are detailed in Section 12-4. If acuity or visual fields are normal, the whole person

impairment rating equals the abnormal visual impairment rating.
Vision Assessment Using Chapter 13
Due to the neurologic basis of vision, some conditions affecting vision may be evaluated using the guidelines in this chapter. Simple cases of visual acuity loss without peripheral field loss, such as those caused by optic neuritis, can be evaluated using Table 13-9. More complex conditions should be evaluated according to the methodology detailed in Chapter 12.

Simple cases of visual field loss, with normal acuity, may be evaluated using Table 13-10. Since postchiasmal lesions will result in vision loss in the contralateral hemifield of both eyes (eg, homonymous hemianopia or quadrantanopia), visual field tests can be an important diagnostic tool in localizing a lesion. For diagnostic purposes, a tangent screen test involving the central 30° is often sufficient. For complex vision loss patterns, especially those with some remaining peripheral vision and noncongruous patterns as may occur in chiasmal lesions, a full evaluation as detailed in Chapter 12 is required.

Note: This table is based on the best corrected acuity and assumes that the visual fields are normal. See Chapter 12 for more complex cases of visual acuity loss. Note that the ability to perform ADL depends largely on the acuity of the better eye.
-- chars 3204 --

Note: This table assumes that the visual acuity is still normal (as in hemianopia with macular sparing). See Chapter 12 for more complex cases, including noncongruous visual field loss and visual field loss combined with visual acuity loss. Note that the ability to perform ADL depends on the extent of the binocular field.

Lesions of the visual cortex may cause a homonymous visual field defect. Parietal lesions may cause visual neglect. Where possible, both these conditions should be evaluated for their effect on ADL skills.
Because of brain plasticity, gradual improvement over a considerable period of time is possible.
Ensure that the impairment is permanent, ie, unlikely to change significantly over the next year. If the vision loss is accompanied by other neurologic dysfunction, use the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to combine the impairment rating from both conditions.

--break--
13.4c Cranial Nerves III, IV, and VI— the Oculomotor, Trochlear, and Abducens Nerves
The oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerves innervate the muscles that move the eyeballs. The oculomotor nerve also controls pupil size and reaction to light. Malfunction of the oculomotor system results in strabismus, ie, misalignment of the visual axes. There are two main types of malfunction: ordinary or comitant strabismus, which occurs mainly in children, and paralytic or noncomitant strabismus, found mainly in adults.

Ordinary or comitant strabismus involves a malfunction of the oculomotor control centers. The angle of deviation is approximately the same in all directions of gaze. This type often results in visual acuity loss in one eye (amblyopia); diplopia is uncommon. The impairment rating is based on the visual acuity loss (see Chapter 12).

Paralytic or noncomitant strabismus is due to a paresis of one of the oculomotor nerves and muscles. The angle of deviation of the visual axes varies with the direction of gaze. Diplopia (double vision) is common. Occlusion of one eye eliminates the diplopia but may have undesirable side effects (such as reduction of the binocular field of vision).

If diplopia exists only in the extremes of gaze, it does not interfere with general ADL skills. If double vision exists at or near the primary direction of gaze, it (or the necessary occlusion) may interfere with ADL skills and would warrant an impairment rating. Assessment should be based on well-documented, individualized considerations as discussed in Chapter 12.

--break--
13.4d Cranial Nerve V—the Trigeminal Nerve
The trigeminal nerve is a mixed nerve with sensory fibers to the face, cornea, anterior scalp, nasal and oral cavities, tongue, and supratentorial dura mater. The nerve also transmits motor impulses to the mastication muscles.

Evaluate sensation in the parts served by the three major divisions of the trigeminal nerve with the usual techniques: pain, temperature, and touch. (See the description of loss of function due to sensory deficit, pain, or discomfort under section 13.9, Criteria for Rating Impairments of the Peripheral Nervous System, Neuromuscular Junction, and Muscular System.) Compare the two sides of the face or body. Bilateral facial sensation loss is uncommon. Combine the impairment percentage for sensation loss that involves the trigeminal nerve with the estimated impairment percentage for pain or motor loss. Pin, cold, and light touch are the best parameters for localization of sensory findings on the face. They can outline impairment of either side of the face, a branch of, or complete trigeminal nerve impairment.
-- chars 3571 --

Brief episodic trigeminal neuralgia or postherpetic neuralgia that involves a branch of the trigeminal nerve may be very severe and uncontrolled. Because there usually is no documented neurologic impairment except for a trigger point with trigeminal neuralgia or allodynia with postherpetic neuralgia, severe, uncontrolled, typical pain may be the impairment. Both atypical, episodic facial pain and typical, neuralgic pain may be evaluated (see Table 13-11) if they have occurred for months and interfere with daily activities. Motor impairment of the trigeminal nerve may affect chewing, swallowing, and speech articulation and may be accompanied by pain or a tic. Bilateral impairment is rare and may be severe. Daily activities may precipitate the pain. Speech, chewing, and swallowing impairments are considered in Chapter 9, Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures.

Comment: This condition occurs in 30% of individuals with ophthalmic herpes. Pain may last for years and is associated with a high suicide risk because of severe uncontrolled neuralgic pain preventing normal usual activities.

--break--
13.4f Cranial Nerve VIII—the Vestibulocochlear Nerve
Cranial nerve VIII is composed of nerves from two adjacent nuclei. The cochlear portion of the nerve is concerned with hearing, and the vestibular portion of the nerve is concerned with vertigo and position and orientation in space. See Chapter 11 for evaluation of hearing impairment without known nerve dysfunction.

Tinnitus in the presence of unilateral hearing loss may impair speech discrimination and adversely influence the ability to carry out daily activities, especially in crowds or noisy places. Therefore, add up to 5% to the impairment evaluation for severe unilateral hearing loss due to tinnitus when ADL are affected.

Dysfunction of the vestibular part of the eighth nerve may be unilateral or bilateral. The impaired person may or may not be able to compensate for a unilateral loss. With bilateral loss of vestibular function, equilibrium and station are dependent on other systems, such as those for visual cues and kinesthetic senses; however, those systems may be inadequate for normal movement or ambulation.

Vertigo is the most disturbing symptom of vestibular dysfunction and is seldom, if ever, minor. Associated symptoms include nausea, vomiting, headache, fear of movement, ataxia, and nystagmus. Movement or environmental object movement may worsen these uncomfortable symptoms. Vertigo as a single entity is evaluated in Chapter 11. Equilibrium and balance impairment is significant if daily activities are limited. See Table 13-13 for criteria for rating impairment of the vestibulocochlear nerve. Criteria of vestibular impairment are detailed in the section discussing equilibrium in Chapter 11, Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures.

--break--
13.4g Cranial Nerves IX and X—the Glossopharyngeal and Vagus Nerves These are mixed nerves that supply sensory fibers
chiefly to the posterior one third of the tongue and to the pharynx, larynx, and trachea. Involvement of the glossopharyngeal nerve by neuralgia usually is selflimiting or treatable and not permanent; the nerve’s involvement may cause a condition similar to trigeminal (V) nerve tic or neuralgia. If the neuralgia persists uncontrolled for a period of months, the physician may be justified in assigning a percentage of impairment that is similar to trigeminal nerve impairment (use Table 13-11). Sensory impairments may contribute to difficulties with breathing, swallowing, speaking, and visceral functions.
-- chars 3580 --

--break--
13.4h Cranial Nerve XI—the Spinal Accessory Nerve
This nerve assists the vagus nerve in supplying some of the muscles of the larynx and innervates the cervical parts of the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles. Impairment of this nerve is judged according to the effects on swallowing and speech, which are considered in Chapter 11, Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures. This nerve also can affect head turning and shoulder motion; related impairments are evaluated according to criteria in Guides Chapters 15, The Spine, and 16, The Upper Extremities.

--break--
13.4i Cranial Nerve XII—the Hypoglossal Nerve
This is a motor nerve that innervates the musculature of the tongue. Unilateral loss of function is not considered to be impairment. Bilateral loss may result in impaired swallowing, breathing, and speech articulation (see Table 13-14). Speech articulation and swallowing are considered in Chapter 11.

--break--
13.5 Criteria for Rating Impairments of Station, Gait, and Movement Disorders
--break--
13.5a Station and Gait Disorders
Problems maintaining balance and a stable gait can develop from a CNS or peripheral neurologic impairment. On physical examination, the physician may observe loss of equal arm or leg movement, falling or staggering to one or the other side, inability to control starting or stopping, and arrhythmic body or extremity movements. Increased tone in the lower extremities from a CNS lesion such as traumatic

brain injury, stroke, or multiple sclerosis may result in a spastic paraparesis or spasticity in one limb.
Loss of station or Romberg sign (falling with eyes closed) may indicate dysfunction in the peripheral nerves or their ascending pathways to the brain.
Peripheral neuropathy, identified by examination and electrodiagnostic tests, is frequently associated with complaints of imbalance or stumbling, since information from sensory receptors is altered.

Impairment ratings for station and gait disorders are determined according to the effect on ambulation (see Table 13-15). Other anatomic or functional changes from other body systems, such as the musculoskeletal system, are combined with the neurologic assessment for station and gait.

--break--
13.5b Movement Disorders
Movement disturbances resulting from cerebral dysfunction are impairments that may affect activities of daily living. Mild tics may have no impact on daily activities, while other involuntary movements, such as tremors (resting, postural, and intention), chorea, athetosis, hemiballismus, and dystonia tone may prevent meaningful use of the extremity. Besides abnormal movements, difficulty with coordination for dexterous or precise movements may interfere with activity; these difficulties can develop from lesions in the basal ganglia or cerebellum. Coordinated movements include gait that may manifest as ataxia requiring use of an ancillary device. Movement disorders, therefore, are assessed for their interference with ADL as described in Tables 13-15, 13-16, and 13-17. For movement disorders affecting the lower extremities, use the station and gait section.
-- chars 3118 --

--break--
13.6 Criteria for Rating Impairments of Upper Extremities Related to Central Impairment
The basic tasks of everyday living depend on dexterous use of the dominant upper extremity. Loss of use of that extremity results, in most instances, in greater impairment than would be the case with impairment of the limb on the nondominant side.
Tables 13-16 and 13-17 are used to rate upper extremity dysfunction from any lesion in the brain. Use these tables for rating upper extremity dysfunction, manifested by weakness, tremor, or pain, that affects ADL. The upper extremity impairment
may result from, but is not limited to, traumatic

brain injury, stroke, neurodegenerative diseases (eg, Parkinson’s disease, progressive supranuclear palsy), multiple sclerosis, and sequelae of CNS infection.

When the spinal cord disorder affects both upper extremities, the individual’s impairment is greater than indicated by a simple combination of impairments of the dominant and nondominant extremities. For these cases, Chapter 15, which covers neurologic impairment from spinal cord disorders, and other sections in this chapter should be used.

The impairment ratings given in Tables 13-16 and 13-17 are determined from neurologic examination of motor strength, coordination, and dexterity.
Functional activities such as buttoning a shirt, lacing shoes, writing, and performing a pegboard task can assess abilities needed for daily activities.

Impairments resulting from spinal cord injuries and other adverse conditions include those relating to station and gait, use of the upper extremities, respiration, urinary bladder function, anorectal function, sexual function, and pain.

Sensory disturbances, including the loss of sense of touch, sense of pain, temperature perception, and sense of vibration and joint position, and paresthesias, dysesthesias, and phantom limb sensations may indicate spinal cord dysfunction. Autonomic system disorders, including disturbances in sweating patterns, regulation of circulation, and regulation of temperature, may occur. Impairment is determined according to the amount of functional impairment and the level of involvement.

When an individual with a spinal cord injury has impairments of several functions or systems, for instance, those of station and gait (Table 13-15), as with hemiparesis and ataxia; of dexterity in using the upper extremity (Tables 13-16 and 13-17); and of bladder, bowel, or sexual functioning, the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) should be used to combine the whole person impairment estimates for the several functions.

Accompanying disorders, such as trophic lesions, urinary calculi, osteoporosis, nutritional disturbances, infections, and reactive psychological states, may occur. The degree to which any of these conditions augments spinal cord impairment should be based on the criteria given in the Guides chapters dealing with those disorders.

--break--
13.7a Respiratory System Neurologic Impairments
Neurologic impairment of one’s ability to breathe is considered in Table 13-18 only in terms of neurologic limitations. Other aspects of respiratory function are covered in Chapter 5, The Respiratory System.
-- chars 3192 --

--break--
13.7 b Urinary System Neurologic Impairments
The ability to control bladder emptying provides the criterion for evaluating permanent bladder impairment resulting from spinal cord and central nervous system disorders (see Table 13-19). Documentation by cystometric or other tests may be necessary.

When evaluating impairments of the bladder, the physician also must consider the status of the upper urinary tract. Refer to Chapter 7, The Urinary and Reproductive Systems, and apply the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) if impairments of several organ systems are present.

--break--
13.7c Anorectal System Neurologic Impairments
The ability to control emptying provides the criterion for evaluating permanent impairment of the anus and rectum due to spinal cord or other neurologic dysfunction (see Table 13-20).

--break--
13.7d Sexual System Neurologic Impairments
Awareness and capability of having an orgasm are the criteria for evaluating permanent impairment of sexual functioning that may result from spinal cord or other neurologic system disorders (see Table 13-21). The individual’s previous sexual functioning should be considered by the physician; age is only one criterion for evaluating previous sexual functioning.
Adjust for age according to criteria outlined in Chapter 7, The Urinary and Reproductive Systems.

--break--
13.8 Criteria for Rating Impairments Related to Chronic Pain
Impairment due primarily to intractable pain may greatly influence an individual’s ability to function. Psychological factors can influence the degree and perception of pain: different individuals in similar circumstances may be impaired by pain to different degrees. A chronic pain syndrome may follow thalamic lesions, but this is rare. Chronic pain in this section covers the diagnoses of causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, and reflex sympathetic dystrophy. The new term complex regional pain syndrome, type I and type II, is not used here since it does not represent a single diagnostic criterion.16

Causalgia is burning pain that develops in a distal extremity following trauma to a peripheral nerve. The burning pain is triggered by movement, light mechanical stimuli to the skin, and strong emotion. Other features include distal extremity swelling and skin that is smooth, mottled, cold, and sweaty.
Sympathetic block frequently relieves the pain. In posttraumatic neuralgia, the burning pain in the distribution of a nerve does not have the other clinical features and does not spread.

Reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD) occurs without known nerve lesions and is precipitated by minor soft tissue trauma. Burning spontaneous pain and stimulus-evoked pain are most pronounced in the

distal limb (allodynia, hyperpathia, and hyperalgesia). The affected limb is usually warmer acutely (less than 6 months) and then is colder. It is now generally believed that a central nervous system abnormality is present based on the autonomic changes of abnormal sweating and skin blood flow. The acute distal swelling usually responds to sympathetic block. In the chronic stage, trophic changes include alteration in nail and hair growth, thin shiny skin, osteoporosis, and restriction of passive movement.
-- chars 3215 --
Postural or action tremor is not uncommon, while an associated movement disorder is relatively rare.

To rate these conditions for impairment, diagnosis is key and is based on clinical criteria. Besides the clinical findings previously described, a three-phase bone scan may show increased uptake in the acute and subacute periods. This study is known to have low sensitivity, 50%,17 and therefore cannot be used as a required criterion for the diagnosis. Plain x-rays may show patchy demineralization, particularly in a periarticular distribution, within months of the onset of RSD. Altered blood flow by laser Doppler flowmetry and abnormal function in the sudomotor reflex also support the diagnosis. It is difficult to examine individuals who are experiencing these symptoms; therefore, once the criteria for the diagnosis have been met, the impact on ADL is determined.

To rate an impairment for causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, and RSD in an upper extremity, use Table 13-22. If a lower extremity needs to be rated for casualgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, or RSD, use
the station and gait impairment criteria given in Table 13-15.

--break--
13.9 Criteria for Rating Impairments of the Peripheral Nervous System, Neuromuscular Junction, and Muscular System
Evaluating the peripheral nervous system requires documentation of the extent of loss of function due to sensory deficit, pain, or discomfort; loss of muscular strength and control of specific muscles or groups of muscles; and alteration of autonomic nervous system (ANS) control. Documentation of these deficiencies should include, if possible, descriptions of the abnormal finding on examinations of the spinal root(s), portion of the plexus, and/or peripheral nerve(s) that are involved. The mechanism or cause

of the abnormality assists in determining the impairment duration and probable prognosis. Ancillary testing by neuroimaging (CT scans, MRIs, radiographs) and physiologic (EMG, nerve conduction velocity [NCV], and evoked responses) tests, may assist in reaching final conclusions.

Neurologic evaluation of pain is based first on the individual’s description of the character, location, intensity, duration, and persistence of the discomfort and on verification of the anatomic distribution of the neurologic defect. A description of the ways and the degrees to which the pain interferes with the individual’s performance of activities of daily living and the factors that augment the discomfort should be included. Anatomic descriptions should be made according to the usual distributions of the roots, plexuses, and nerves of the nervous system when the distal digital nerves are being evaluated, especially in the hand, as indicated in Chapters 15 and 16.

Grading procedures for sensory and motor impairments in single distal digital nerves of the hand are found in Chapter 16, The Upper Extremities. For evaluations of neurologic problems of the peripheral neuromuscular system, the standard techniques of neurologic examination are used (see Tables 13-23 and 13-24). The muscle strength grading system (Table 13-24) is similar to the system recommended by the Medical Research Council of the United Kingdom. Involvement of peripheral nerves or roots may lead to paralysis or weakness of the muscles supplied by them, as well as to characteristic sensory changes. The system of the Medical Research Council18 is the one recommended in the Guides for evaluating muscle function and testing impairments (Table 13-23). In this system, movement of the part is tested against the examiner’s resistance plus gravity, without the effect of gravity, against gravity, and for slight or no movement. The contralateral extremity is tested also, and the results are compared with those in the affected limb.
-- chars 3781 --

Symptoms of sensory deficits and pain in peripheral nerves as described in Chapter 16, The Upper Extremities, include anesthesia, hypesthesia, dysesthesia, paresthesia, hyperesthesia, cold intolerance, and an intense, burning pain. Sensory dysfunction associated with peripheral nerve disorders is evaluated according to the following criteria: (1) How does the pain or sensory deficit interfere with the individual’s performance of daily activities? (2) To what extent does the pain or sensory deficit follow the defined anatomic pathways of the root, plexus, or peripheral nerve? (3) To what extent does the description of the

pain or sensory deficit indicate that it is caused by a peripheral nerve abnormality? (4) To what extent does the pain or sensory deficit correspond to other disturbances of the involved nerve structure? Only persistent pain or discomfort that leads to permanent loss of function, in spite of maximum effort toward medical rehabilitation and allowing an optimal period of time for physiologic adjustment, should be evaluated as a permanent impairment. Pain that does not meet more than one of the above criteria is not considered to be within the scope of this section.

Pain is defined in Chapter 18 as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage or described in terms of such damage.” Pain is a subjective symptom and is difficult to evaluate, but its presence, anatomic background, and intensity may be verified with a thorough examination. Chronic pain for causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, and RSD is evaluated in Table 13-22.

Motivation and malingering as they may relate to the presence or absence of an impairment or a supposed impairment are considered in Chapter 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders.

Sensory dysfunction, to be rated, must be considered permanent. The methodology used for spinal nerves, brachial plexus, and individual nerves is described below. Terms used to describe sensory impairment that may not be readily apparent to all readers are defined. Sensation refers to the sensory perception of the primary sensory modalities, pain, heat, cold, and touch, those involved in protective sensation.
Sensibility refers to the discriminative features of sensation such as graphesthesia, stereognosis, or two-point discrimination. The issue of sensibility is important to the normal function of the hand. This is
why sensory loss in the digits is focused on impaired two-point discrimination (see Table 16-10).

Grading procedures for sensory and/or motor impairments in all peripheral nerves (except sensory loss in the digits (Table 16-10) is found in Tables 13-23 and 13-24. The maximum impairment for spinal roots, brachial plexus, and individual nerves is noted under the respective sections below.

--break--
13.9a Roots of Spinal Nerves
Spinal nerves are evaluated by loss of function in the peripheral nerve that receives contribution from the involved spinal root. If two or more spinal roots are involved, the increased loss of function from the contribution of two spinal roots to a peripheral nerve
-- chars 3121 --

necessitates that the impairment be rated according to the brachial plexus (see Section 13.8b).

Table 16-13 provides the maximum upper extremity impairment due to unilateral sensory or motor deficits of individual spinal roots C5 through T1. Once the sensory deficit or pain is estimated according to
Table 13-23 and motor deficit according to 13-24, these percent deficits in the upper extremity are multiplied by the respective maximum sensory and/or motor impairments of the spinal nerve in question, Table 16-18. The sensory and motor impairments are combined using the Combined Values Chart, p. 604, for the total upper extremity impairment, which is then converted to whole person impairment (Table 16-3). If deficits are bilateral, the whole person impairment is found for each extremity and then combined using the Combined Values Chart.

For the spinal roots in the lower extremity, L3 through S1, use Table 15-18 to determine the maximum lower

extremity impairment due to unilateral sensory or motor deficits. Follow the same procedure already outlined for the upper extremity with regard to grading the impairment; use Tables 13-23 and
--break--
13-24, then multiply by the maximum loss of function for the nerve root in question and combine sensory and motor impairment and convert to whole person impairment.

--break--
13.9b Brachial Plexus
The anatomy of the brachial plexus and clinical presentation resulting from lesions that involve the upper and lower trunk are presented in Section 16.5b. Table 16-14 provides the maximum impairment due to unilateral sensory or motor deficits of the brachial plexus by the entire brachial plexus and the upper, middle, and lower trunks. If there is partial recovery, individual muscles are graded according to Table
--break--
13-24. This value is multiplied by the maximum upper extremity impairment for the nerve innervating

the muscle listed in Table 16-15. Results from all the muscles are combined using the Combined Values Chart, p. 604, and the total upper extremity impairment converted to a whole person impairment, Table 16-3. A very useful diagram that demonstrates the motor innervation of all muscles in the upper extremity by spinal roots, peripheral nerve, and anatomical proximal-distal location in the upper extremity is found on Figure 16-47.

--break--
13.9 c Peripheral Nerve Impairments
This section is used to rate sensory and motor impairments from individual nerve lesions or multiple nerve disorders such as polyneuropathy or mononeuritis multiplex. Grading procedures for sensory and motor impairments resulting from peripheral nerve disorders in the upper and lower extremities are found in Tables 13-23 and 13-24.
This percent impairment is multiplied by the appropriate maximum loss of function for the nerve in

question due to sensory deficit and pain or motor deficit, Table 16-15 for the upper extremity and Table 17-37 for the lower extremity. Sensory and motor impairments of the upper extremity are combined using the Combined Values Chart, page 604. The result is converted to a whole person impairment, Table 16-3.
-- chars 3111 --

If multiple nerves are involved in one extremity, the same procedure is followed for each nerve. Once the sensory and motor impairments for each nerve have been combined using the Combined Values Chart, all the nerves rated in one extremity are combined, again using the Combined Values Chart to determine the total impairment in the affected limb. If more than one limb is involved, each total extremity impairment is converted to a whole person impairment (Table 16-3), and these values are again combined using the Combined Values Chart.

Method:
--break--
1. Loss of motor function in the distal muscles of the tibial nerve and peroneal nerve in the feet. The maximum motor loss (Table 17-37) for the medial plantar is 2% whole person impairment and for the lateral plantar is 2% whole person impairment ? 25% = grade 4 motor loss (Table 13-24) = 1% for the medial plantar and 1% for the lateral plantar. The maximum motor loss (Table 17-37) for the peroneal nerve in the foot of 5% whole person impairment (5% maximum motor loss is attributed to the foot since the entire common peroneal motor impairment is 15% in Table 17-37) ? 25% = grade 4 motor loss (Table 13-24) = 1%. The total motor impairment in the distal muscles of one lower extremity is 1% and 1% and 1% = 3% whole person impairment.
--break--
2. Loss of function due to sensory involvement of
the medial and lateral plantar nerves, sural nerve, and superficial peroneal nerves. The maximum sensory loss (Table 17-37) is 2% for the medial plantar and 2% for the lateral plantar is 2% ? 40% = class 4 sensory loss (Table 13-23) = 1% for the medial plantar and 1% for the lateral plantar. The maximum sensory loss (Table 17-37) for the sural nerve is 1% ? 40%
= class 4 sensory loss (Table 13-23) = 0.4%, which is equal to 0% for the sural nerve. The maximum sensory loss (Table 17-37) for the superficial peroneal nerve is 2% ? 40% = class 4 sensory loss (Table 13-24) = 1% for the superficial peroneal nerve. The total sensory impairment in the foot is 1% and 1% + 0% and 1% = 3% whole person impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
--break--
3.
Loss of motor function in the hand from median and ulnar nerve dysfunction. The maximum motor loss for the median nerve is 10% (Table 16-15) ? 15% from grade 4 motor loss
(Table 13-24) = 1.5% or 2% of the upper extremity impairment. The maximum motor loss for the ulnar nerve is 35% (Table 16-15) ? 15% from grade 4 motor loss (Table 13-24) = 5%. The total motor impairment in the hand is 2% and 5% = 7% whole person impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
--break--
4. Loss of sensory function in the hand from median and ulnar nerve dysfunction. The maximum sensory loss for the median nerve of 38% (Table 16-15) ? 15% from class 3 sensory loss (Table 13-23) = 6% of the upper extremity or 4% whole person impairment (Table 16-3). The maximum sensory loss for the ulnar nerve of 7% (Table 16-15) ? 15% from class 3 sensory loss (Table 13-23) = 1% of the upper extremity or 1% whole person impairment. The total sensory impairment in the hand is 4% and 1% = 5% whole person impairment.
-- chars 3126 --
--break--
5. Using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604), the motor and sensory impairment for the foot is 3% and 3% = 6% whole person impairment. The motor and sensory impairment in the hand is 7% and 5% = 12% whole person impairment. Since a sensorimotor polyneuropathy is a symmetric lesion, the 6% and 12% = 17% for one side is doubled to 17% and 17% = 31% whole person impairment.

--break--
13.9d Neuromuscular Impairments Neuromuscular impairment as present in longstanding myasthenia gravis or myasthenic syndromes is accompanied by proximal weakness; impairment is rated by the impact on activities of daily living.
For the lower extremities, station and gait are rated as described in activities of Table 13-15. The upper extremities are rated using Tables 13-16 and
--break--
13-17, which provide criteria for functional loss in one or both upper extremities.

--break--
13.9e Muscular Impairments
This is a varied group of disorders that includes muscular dystrophy, metabolic myopathy, abnormal potassium metabolism and muscle disease, endocrine myopathies, and inflammatory muscle disease. The unifying clinical feature is proximal weakness that, in some cases, may involve the neck and face. The proximal weakness is best rated by its effect on the activities of daily living. See Table 13-15 for the lower extremities and Tables 13-16 and 13-17 for functional loss in one or both upper extremities.

Neuromuscular and muscular impairments for the lower extremities are rated using Tables 17-6 and 17-8 (Chapter 17). Also, Table 13-15 is useful when gait is the most significant impairment from the neuromuscular or muscular disorder.

--break--
13.9f The Autonomic Nervous System
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) influences the functioning of many organ systems; thus, failure of the system can increase impairment. Neurologic conditions that have ANS involvement include polyneuropathy of various causes, familial dysautonomia, Landry-Guillain-Barré syndrome, syringomyelia, porphyria, cord and brain tumors, and myelopathy.

Lack of control of blood pressure, body thermal regulation, and bladder and bowel elimination are prominent signs of ANS failure. Impairments related to transient loss of awareness or consciousness after a period of cerebral ischemia may be due to various mechanisms, including orthostasis, reflex actions, or cardiopulmonary disorders, and may be estimated by means of Table 13-2. Referring to other Guides chapters also may be necessary to estimate the magnitudes of the impairments (Chapters 3 through 5).

Impairments of spinal nerves, roots, plexuses, or peripheral nerves by various diseases or injuries may be partial or complete, unilateral or bilateral, related to motor or sensory functions, with or without pain. Each of these attributes or characteristics should be evaluated. When there is bilateral involvement, the two unilateral impairments should be determined; then the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) should be used to estimate whole person impairment.
-- chars 3013 --

--break--
13.10 Nervous System Impairment Evaluation Summary
See Table 13-25 for an evaluation summary for the assessment of nervous system impairments.

================================================================================
Chapter 14:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Mental and Behavioral Disorders
14.1 Principles of Assessment
14.2 Psychiatric Diagnosis and Impairment
14.3 A Method of Evaluating Psychiatric Impairment
14.4 Assessing Impairment Severity
14.5 Examples of Impairment Due to Mental and Behavioral Disorders
14.6 Format of the Impairment Report
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter discusses impairments due to mental disorders and considers behavioral impairment of function that may complicate any condition. As did Chapter 13 (The Central and Peripheral Nervous System), this chapter assesses the brain; however, here the emphasis is on evaluating brain function and its effect on behavior for mental disorders. Unlike the other chapters in the Guides, this chapter focuses more on the process of performing a mental and behavioral impairment assessment. Numerical impairment ratings are not included; however, instructions are given for how to assess an individual’s abilities to perform activities of daily living.

The following revisions have been made for the fifth edition:

--break--
1. The importance of following the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV) criteria for determining a mental impairment is emphasized.1
--break--
2. The section on social security disability assessment has been removed. The Social Security Administration criteria focus on disability and work disability assessment, which is not the purpose of the AMA Guides. However, some of the
material in this chapter is taken directly from Social Security Administration (SSA) regulations.2-4
--break--
3. Additional case examples exemplify the relationship between diagnosis, typical symptoms and signs of the disorder, and the impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living. Examples are included for depression, personality disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The case examples, together with Table 14-1, should help clarify how, in common psychiatric disorders, one can provide a nonnumerical impairment rating. Some states have chosen to assign numerical percentages to these categories.
--break--
4. A summary template of factors to be included in a psychiatric assessment has been added.

--break--
14.1 Principles of Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluations.

Several principles, described below, are central to assessing mental impairment. A clear diagnosis is required to assess permanent mental or behavioral impairment. This diagnosis needs to be established according to DSM-IV criteria. The diagnosis is among the factors to be considered in assessing the severity and possible duration of the impairment, but it is not the sole criterion to be used.
-- chars 3323 --

Motivation for improvement may be a key factor in the severity and extent of an individual’s impairment, whether that impairment is physical or mental. The examiner needs to assess changes in motivation and whether problems in motivation are due to the illness or to secondary gains. Motivation is influenced by multiple factors, including the illness, as well as the individual’s personality, coping style, self-esteem, and self-confidence. These factors may change over time. The loss of motivation for even purely pleasurable activities may be a sign or symptom of an illness such as depression or schizophrenia. However, some individuals may be demoralized or in some way unmotivated to improve by external circumstances (such as fiscal incentives to stay ill and maintain health insurance).

Assessing impairment requires a thorough review of the history of the mental disorder, the history of the individual’s ability to function over time, and his or her response to treatment and rehabilitation.

--break--
14.1 a Interpretations of Symptoms and Signs
The individual’s own description of his or her functioning and limitations is an important source of information. Information from nonmedical sources, such as family members and others who have knowledge of the person, may be useful in indicating the level of functioning and the severity of the impairment.

Information concerning the individual’s behavior while performing activities of daily living is particularly useful in determining his or her ability to function. Results of work evaluations and rehabilitation programs, as well as information from day programs, are also useful in assessing level of functioning.

Information from both medical and nonmedical sources may be used to obtain detailed descriptions of the individual’s activities of daily living, social functioning, concentration, persistence, pace, and ability to tolerate increased mental demands (stress). This information may be available from professionals in community mental health centers, daycare centers, and sheltered workshops, and it also can be provided by family members. If the descriptions from these sources are insufficiently detailed or in conflict with the observed clinical picture or the reports of others, it is necessary to resolve the inconsistencies. Any gaps in the history should also be explained.

An individual’s level of functioning may vary considerably over time. The level of functioning at a specific time may seem relatively adequate or, conversely, rather poor. Proper evaluation of an impairment must take into account variations in the level of functioning over time to arrive at a determination of severity. Thus, it is important to obtain evidence over a sufficiently long period of time before the date of examination. This evidence should include treatment notes, hospital discharge summaries, work evaluations, and rehabilitation progress notes if they are available.

--break--
14.1 b Description of Clinical Studies The use of well-standardized psychological tests, such as the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale
-- chars 3093 --
(WAIS) and the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-2 (MMPI-2) may improve diagnostic acumen and help establish the existence of a mental disorder. For example, the WAIS is useful in documenting mental retardation. Broad-based neuropsychological assessments using, for example, the Halstead-Reitan or the Luria-Nebraska batteries may be useful in determining deficiencies in brain functioning, particularly in individuals with subtle signs such as those that may be seen in traumatic brain injuries.

Taking a standardized test requires concentration, persistence, and pacing; thus, observing individuals during the testing process may yield useful information. The summary of test results should include the objective findings, a description of what occurred during the testing, and the test results. A report of intellectual assessment should include a discussion of whether the obtained intelligence quotient (IQ) score is considered to be valid and consistent with the individual’s impairment and degree of functional limitation.

--break--
14.2 Psychiatric
Diagnosis and Impairment
In general, the history, signs, and symptoms of a mental disorder should justify the diagnosis, which should be made according to DSM-IV criteria. If there is uncertainty about the exact diagnosis, the differential diagnosis should be discussed. Document adequate descriptions of impairments and functional limitations from the reports of professional sources, such as psychiatrists, psychologists, psychiatric nurses, psychiatric social workers, and health professionals in hospitals and clinics. Data gathered over a period of years are particularly useful.

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, commonly known as DSM-IV, is a widely accepted classification system for mental disorders. It is similar to another system, the International Classification of Diseases (ICD), which also is in widespread use.5 The criteria for mental disorders include a wide range of signs, symptoms, and impairments. Many mental disorders are characterized by impairments in a number of

areas. DSM-IV calls for a multiaxial evaluation. Each of five axes refers to a different class of information. The first three axes constitute the major diagnostic categories. These include the major clinical syndromes and the conditions that are the focus of treatment (axis I), the personality and developmental disorders (axis II), and the physical disorders and conditions that may be relevant to understanding and managing the care of the individual (axis III). Axis IV, referring to psychosocial stressors, and axis V, referring to adaptive functioning, may be particularly important for assessing impairment severity. In particular, axis V is a rating of the individual’s global functional capacity and, like disability, is related directly to the effects of impairments.

In some individuals it is not possible to make a determination on the basis of the available information.
Under these circumstances, the examiner should not feel obligated to provide an opinion about which he or she is uncertain but should seek and review relevant information from additional sources, such as medical and employment records, before rendering an opinion. The examiner must also consider the effects that medication, motivation, and rehabilitation may have on the individual’s signs, symptoms, and ability to function. A detailed discussion of these factors follows.
-- chars 3465 --

--break--
14.2 a Effects of Medication
Attention must be given to the effects of medication on the individual’s signs, symptoms, and ability to function. Although psychoactive medications may control certain signs or symptoms, such as hallucinations, impaired attention span, restlessness, or hyperactivity, such treatment may not affect all impairments and limitations imposed by the mental disorder. If an individual’s symptoms are attenuated by psychoactive medications, the evaluator should focus particular attention on limitations that may persist. Those limitations should be used as measures of the impairment’s severity.

Psychoactive medications used to treat some mental illnesses may cause drowsiness, blunted affect, or unwanted effects involving various body systems. Moreover, medications necessary to control such symptoms as hallucinations may result in decreased motivation and level of activity. These side effects should be considered in evaluating the overall severity of the individual’s impairment and ability to function. As explained in Chapter 2, the evaluator may need to provide an impairment estimate for the drug’s side effects.

--break--
14.2 b Effects of Motivation
Assessing motivation is difficult because lack of motivation may be hard to distinguish from mental impairment and is, in fact, a classic symptom of schizophrenia. When is an individual lacking energy, concentration, and initiative depressed or autistically preoccupied, and when is the individual unmotivated? Ultimately, making this distinction requires a clinical judgment, which should be aided by careful investigation of the individual’s efforts and accomplishments before the onset of the alleged impairment and a search for associated signs and symptoms of common mental disorders.

Motivation is a difficult issue for assessment since it is mutifactorial in nature, involving the following potential factors: (1) lack of motivation as a sign of illness such as depression or schizophrenia; (2) fear of losing entitlement or other benefits of being ill;
(3) a side effect of some neuroleptic medications;
(4) conscious malingering; (5) a consequence of demoralization of persons with any chronic illness;
(6) social network support for illness; and others. Thus, the determination of motivation is often nonempirical, and conclusions are all too often drawn on the basis of prejudice. Many times, an individual’s motivation is not well understood even after careful assessment.

Nevertheless, motivation is a link between impairment and disability. For some people, poor motivation is a major cause of poor functioning. An individual’s underlying character may be important in determining whether he or she is motivated to benefit from rehabilitation. Personality characteristics usually remain unchanged throughout life. However, internal events and psychological reactions can influence the course of illness. An individual who tends to be dependent, for example, may become even more dependent as his or her illness proceeds.
-- chars 3037 --

--break--
14.2 c Effects of Rehabilitation
Frequently, the degree of vocational limitation of the individual with impairment of function is of paramount importance to the evaluator. This limitation may range from minimal to total. In addition, the severity of functional impairment may change with the course of the illness. When the individual needs less medical care, vocational skills may be intact, or the individual may have limitations that may or may not be reversible. The evaluator should judge the possible duration of the impairment that remains, whether remission is likely to be fast or slow, whether it will be partial or total, and whether the

impairment is likely to remain stable or to change. These considerations should contribute to the examiner’s judgment about the degree of impairment.

Rehabilitation is a sine qua non in the treatment of most people who have recovered or are recovering from the acute phase of a mental disorder, especially a major mental disorder. Even if it is not possible to effect total remission, an outcome may be considered worthwhile if it has been possible to move the individual’s functional impairment to a lesser degree.

While for some persons lack of motivation appears to be a major feature of continuing impairment and may be a major feature of an ongoing mental disorder, many individuals who undergo proper rehabilitative measures, including some who have organic illnesses, achieve improvements in functioning.
Determining whether impaired functioning will persist is sometimes an imprecise science, and some degree of uncertainty about this prediction often exists. The use of the impairment label can be seen as pessimistic, providing an adverse prediction that may be self-fulfilling. However, the tendency for physicians and others to minimize psychiatric impairments must also be considered; this tendency may lead to failure to refer individuals for potentially helpful rehabilitative measures.

An important aspect of rehabilitation is the recognition that an individual who is taking certain types of medication may be able to sustain a satisfactory degree of functioning, whereas without medication he or she might fail to do so. For instance, there may be only a slight problem in the thinking process while the person is taking a suitable medication but a severe one if he or she is not taking medication. The physician should note the individual’s performance with and without medication.

Another consideration is providing an employer the assurance that a worker who is taking the proper medication and is in an appropriate job can avoid injury both to himself or herself and to coworkers. An analogy is seen in the care and treatment of a worker who has seizures: in such an instance, informing and educating the worker, as well as his or her family, employer, and coworkers, are vital steps and should be a part of the rehabilitation process.

Just as there are degrees of impairment, total rehabilitation may not be possible, as is the case in the great majority of individuals afflicted with schizophrenia. To use an analogy from physical medicine, it is essentially impossible for an amputated leg to be
-- chars 3187 --

replaced, and the affected individual cannot hope to regain perfect ambulation. However, a well-fitted prosthesis, accompanied by practice and training, can greatly improve the individual’s ability to walk. If, in addition, the individual obtains suitable transportation, he or she may be restored to full gainful employment. If normal ambulation is a job requirement, an employer may be able to provide an alternative position or to modify existing tasks so that they can be performed by an amputee making skillful use of a prosthesis.

Although the analogy between the loss of a limb and the loss of capability resulting from a mental disorder has limitations, impairment from a mental disorder can be just as real and severe as the impairment resulting from an injury or other illness. The link between motivation and recovery may need strengthening in individuals who are impaired by either physical or mental illness. This task falls primarily to rehabilitationists and psychiatrists, but others can assist. An employer’s providing alternative tasks or modifying existing work conditions may be as much a part of restoring vocational possibilities to an individual with mental illness as it is to one recovering from an injury or to one who has elements of both mental and physical illness.

--break--
14.3 A Method of Evaluating Psychiatric Impairment
Percentages are not provided to estimate mental impairment in this edition of the Guides. Unlike cases with some organ systems, there are no precise measures of impairment in mental disorders. The use of percentages implies a certainty that does not exist. Percentages are likely to be used inflexibly by adjudicators, who then are less likely to take into account the many factors that influence mental and behavioral impairment. In addition, the authors are unaware of data that show the reliability of the impairment percentages. After considering this difficult matter, the Committee on Disability and Rehabilitation of the American Psychiatric Association advised Guides contributors against the use of percentages in the chapter on mental and behavioral disorders of the fourth edition, and that remains the opinion of the authors of the present chapter.

No available empirical evidence supports any method for assigning a percentage of impairment of the whole person; however, the following approach may be helpful in estimating the extent of mental impairments. Not everyone who has a mental or behavioral disorder is limited in the ability to perform activities of daily living; however, there are individuals with less than chronic, but still unremitting, impairments who are severely limited in some areas of function.6

Translating specific impairments directly and precisely into functional limitations is a complex and poorly understood process. Current research finds little relationship between such psychiatric signs and symptoms as those identified during a mental status examination and the ability to perform competitive work. However, four main categories exist that assess many areas of function: (1) ability to perform activities of daily living; (2) social functioning;
-- chars 3154 --
(3) concentration, persistence, and pace; and
(4) deterioration or decompensation in work or worklike settings. Independence, appropriateness, and effectiveness of activities should also be considered. The four aspects of functional limitation are discussed below and can be linked, or causally related, to specific impairments as described in Table 14-1. The examiner should assess and record the extent of function in all these categories.

--break--
14.3 a Activities of Daily Living
Activities of daily living, as indicated in Table 1-2, include such activities as self-care, personal hygiene, communication, ambulation, travel, sexual function, and sleep. Any limitations in these activities of daily living should be related to the mental disorder rather than to such factors as lack of money or transportation. In the context of the individual’s overall situation, the quality of these activities is judged by their independence, appropriateness, effectiveness, and sustainability. It is necessary to define the extent to which the individual is capable of initiating and participating in these activities independent of supervision or direction.

The examiner must assess not simply the number of activities that are restricted but the overall degree of restriction or combination of restrictions. For example, a person who is able to cook and clean might be considered to have marked restriction of daily activities if he or she were too fearful to leave home to shop or go to the physician’s office.

--break--
14.3 b Social Functioning
Social functioning refers to an individual’s capacity to interact appropriately and communicate effectively with other individuals. Social functioning includes the ability to get along with others, such as family members, friends, neighbors, grocery clerks, landlords, or bus drivers. Impaired social functioning may be demonstrated by a history of altercations, evictions, firings, fear of strangers, avoidance of interpersonal relationships, social isolation, or similar events or characteristics. It is helpful to give specific examples illustrating the individual’s impaired social functioning.

Strength in social functioning may be documented by an individual’s ability to initiate social contact with others, communicate clearly with others, and interact and actively participate in group activities. Cooperative behavior, consideration for others, awareness of others’ sensitivities, and social maturity also need to be considered. Social functioning in work situations may involve interactions with the public, responding to persons in authority such as supervisors, or being part of a team.

The overall degree of interference with a particular aspect or combination of aspects is as significant as the number of aspects in which social functioning is impaired. For example, a hostile, uncooperative person who is tolerated by local storekeepers and neighbors may have marked restriction in overall functioning because antagonism and hostility are not acceptable in the workplace or in social contexts.
-- chars 3060 --

--break--
14.3c Concentration, Persistence, and Pace Concentration, persistence, and pace are needed to perform many activities of daily living, including task completion. Task completion refers to the ability to sustain focused attention long enough to permit the timely completion of tasks commonly found in activities of daily living or work settings. Deficiencies in concentration, persistence, and pace are best noted from previous work attempts or from observations in worklike settings, such as day-treatment centers and incentive work programs. Describing specific examples of the individual’s capabilities is useful. Major impairments of these abilities can often be assessed through direct psychiatric examinations or psychological testing. However, mental status examinations or psychological test data alone should not be considered adequate to fully describe the individual’s concentration and sustained ability to perform
work tasks.

Concentration and mental status may be assessed by having the individual perform such tasks as subtracting 7s serially from 100. In psychological tests of intelligence or memory, concentration is assessed through tasks requiring short-term memory or tasks that must be completed within established time limits. Strengths and weaknesses in mental concentration may be described in terms of frequency of errors, the time it takes to complete the task, and the extent to which assistance is required to complete the task. A person who appears to concentrate adequately during a mental status examination or a psychological test may not do so in a setting more like one common to the working world.

--break--
14.3d Deterioration or Decompensation in Complex or Worklike Settings
Deterioration or decompensation in complex or worklike settings refers to an individual’s repeated failure to adapt to stressful circumstances. In the face of such circumstances, the individual may withdraw from the situation or experience exacerbation of signs and symptoms of a mental disorder; that is, he or she may decompensate and have difficulty maintaining performance of activities of daily living, continuing social relationships, and completing tasks.
Stresses common to the work environment include attendance, making decisions, scheduling, completing tasks, and interacting with supervisors and peers. It is useful to give examples of the individual’s decompensation and the stresses that might have brought it about.

In assessing the individual’s stress tolerance, the examiner should be mindful of the following issues. First, stress may be defined in reference to a “reasonable man” standard in some systems and to other standards in other systems. Second, the circumstances of a given case might suggest a prophylactic preclusion from certain types of tasks or work settings. For example, a person with symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder that date from a robbery and assault might require a prophylactic preclusion from jobs involving contact with the general public or handling large sums of money. In contrast, a stressful personality clash between the individual and his or her supervisor might require only that the individual be precluded from working with that particular supervisor.
-- chars 3241 --

--break--
14.3e Classes of Impairment Due to Mental and Behavioral Disorders
Table 14-1 provides a guide for rating mental impairment in each of the four areas of functional limitation on a five-category scale that ranges from no impairment to extreme impairment. The following are recommended as anchors for the categories of the scale.

--break--
1. None means no impairment is noted in the function.
--break--
2. Mild implies that any discerned impairment is compatible with most useful functioning.
--break--
3. Moderate means that the identified impairments are compatible with some, but not all, useful functioning.
--break--
4. Marked is a level of impairment that significantly impedes useful functioning. Taken alone, a marked impairment would not completely preclude functioning, but together with marked limitation in another class, it might limit useful functioning.
--break--
5. Extreme means that the impairment or limitation is not compatible with useful function. Extreme

impairment in carrying out activities of daily living implies complete dependency on another person for care. In the sphere of social functioning, extreme impairment implies that the individual engages in no meaningful social contact, as with a person who is in a withdrawn, catatonic state. An extreme limitation in concentration, persistence, and pace means that the individual cannot attend to conversation or any productive task; this might be seen in a person who is in an acute confusional state or in a person with a complete loss of shortterm memory.

A person who cannot tolerate any change at all in routines or in the environment, or one who cannot function and who decompensates when schedules change in an otherwise structured environment, has an extreme limitation of adaptive functioning and an extreme psychiatric impairment. Such an individual might, for example, experience a psychotic episode if a meal is not served on time or might have a panic attack if left without a companion in any situation.

In the ordinary individual, extreme impairment in only one area or marked limitation in two or more spheres would be likely to preclude the performance of any complex task, such as one involving recreation or work, without special support or assistance, such as that provided in a sheltered environment.

An individual impaired to a moderate degree in all four categories of functioning would be limited in the ability to carry out many, but not all, complex tasks. Mild and moderate limitations reduce overall performance but do not preclude some performance. Table 14-2 links specific impairments to potential associated disabilities.

Translating these guidelines for rating individual impairment on ordinal scales into a method for assigning percentage of impairments, as if valid estimates could be made on precisely measured interval scales, cannot be done reliably. One cannot be certain that the difference in impairment between a rating of mild and moderate is of the same magnitude as the difference between moderate and marked. Furthermore, a moderate impairment does not imply a 50% limitation in useful functioning, and an estimate of moderate impairment in all four categories does not imply a 50% impairment of the whole person.
-- chars 3254 --

Eventually, research may disclose direct relationships between medical findings and percentages of mental impairment. Until that time, the medical profession must refine its concepts of mental and physical impairment, improve its ability to measure limitations, and continue to make clinical judgments.

--break--
14.4 Assessing
Impairment Severity
The following factors, discussed below, must be considered when assessing severity of an individual’s impairment: (1) the effects of treatment; (2) the effects of structured settings; (3) the variability of mental disorders; (4) an assessment of workplace function; and (5) the effects of common mental and behavioral conditions.

--break--
14.4a Effects of Treatment
Problems often arise in evaluating mental impairments of individuals who have long histories of repeated hospitalizations or prolonged outpatient care with supportive therapy and medication. Individuals with

chronic psychotic disorders commonly have their lives structured in such a way as to minimize stress and reduce their signs and symptoms. Such individuals may therefore be more impaired in terms of work capability than their signs and symptoms indicate. The results of a single examination may not adequately describe the ability of such a person to function in a sustained way. Thus, it is necessary to review information pertaining to the individual’s functioning at times of increased stress, such as in a worklike setting.

--break--
14.4b Effects of Structured Settings
In cases involving long-standing mental disorders, overt symptoms may be particularly controlled or attenuated by psychosocial factors, such as placement in a hospital, halfway house, board and care facility, or similar environment. These highly structured and supportive settings may greatly reduce the mental demands placed on an individual. Although overt signs and symptoms of the underlying mental disorder may be minimized with lowered mental demands, the individual’s ability to function outside of the structured setting may not have changed. The evaluator of an individual whose symptoms are controlled in a structured setting must consider such factors as the individual’s response to past attempts to function successfully at work or in other unstructured environments.

--break--
14.4 c Variability of Mental Disorders
In judging the degree of mental impairment, it is important to recognize that there are various types of mental disorders, each of which, like a physical disorder, has its own natural course and unique characteristics. In addition, degrees of impairment may vary considerably among individuals with the same diagnosis.

It is apparent that some serious mental disorders are chronic. The term remission, rather than cure, is therefore used to indicate an individual’s improvement. The remission may be intermittent, long term, or short term, and it may occur in stages rather than all at once. For example, an episode of depression that follows a stressful life event may turn out to be an adjustment disorder with depressed mood, which often is a short-term, self-limiting illness that clears up when the stressful situation is relieved. Other affective disorders have their own patterns of recurrence and chronicity that often, but not always, respond well to therapeutic interventions. Thus, an individual with a medication-resistant major depressive episode may remain unable to sleep, eat, concentrate, etc, for months or even years.
-- chars 3471 --

--break--
14.4d Assessment of Workplace Function Assessment of the ability to perform activities at work requires evaluation of similar abilities, along with unique skills, particular to the workplace. To assess the ability of an individual to function in the workplace, the evaluator may obtain additional information by using a multidimensional description of remaining work-related abilities. Four capacities, indicated below, have been used by SSA regulations to characterize residual functional capacity.

--break--
1. Understanding and memory relate to the individual’s ability to remember procedures related to work; to understand and remember short, simple instructions; and to understand and remember detailed instructions.

--break--
2. Sustained concentration and persistence relate to the individual’s ability to carry out short, simple instructions; carry out detailed instructions; maintain attention and concentration for extended periods of time; perform activities within a given schedule; maintain regular attendance and be punctual within customary tolerances; sustain an ordinary routine without special supervision; work with or near others without being distracted; make simple work-related decisions; complete a normal workday and workweek without interruptions from psychologically based symptoms; and perform at a consistent pace without an unreasonable number of and unreasonably long rest periods.

--break--
3. Social interaction involves the individual’s ability to interact appropriately with the general public; ask simple questions or request assistance; accept instructions and respond appropriately to criticism from supervisors; get along with coworkers and peers without distracting them or exhibiting behavioral extremes; maintain socially appropriate behavior; and adhere to basic standards of neatness and cleanliness.

--break--
4. Adaptation is the ability to respond appropriately to changes in the work setting; to be aware of normal hazards and take appropriate precautions; to use public transportation and travel to and within unfamiliar places; to set realistic goals; and to make plans independently of others.

--break--
14.4e Effects of Common Mental and Behavioral Conditions
Some categories of mental and behavioral conditions, including substance-dependence disorders, personality disorders (especially antisocial personality disorders), and adjustment disorders, are characterized by abnormal emotional responses to stressful life events, which resolve in a short time when the stressor is removed. The behavior during both controlled intervals and times of exacerbation should be noted.

The schizophrenias are usually chronic disorders; the onset may be insidious and recognized only in retrospect. Certain organic disorders, such as traumatic brain injury and lifelong mental retardation, are persistent and chronic, and treatment consists of minimizing the functional loss inherent to the pathophysiologic changes. Evaluation of mental retardation and autism for social security considers the presence of mental incapacity evidenced by
-- chars 3095 --
(1) dependence on others for personal needs, such as toileting, eating, dressing, or bathing; and (2) an inability to follow directions, which precludes tests of intellectual functioning; or (3) a valid verbal performance or full-scale IQ of 59 or less, or a score of 60 through 69 along with physical or mental impairment affecting daily activities, social functioning, or concentration, persistence, and pace. Common psychiatric diagnoses, associated impairments in the
form of demonstrable signs and symptoms, and commonly seen areas of decreased performance are discussed below and in Table 14-2 .

--break--
14.4e.1 Substance Abuse and Personality Disorders
Chronic substance abuse and personality disorders can coincide. The effects of chronic substance abuse include impairments in concentration, attention, impulse control, judgment, etc, which often last for the duration of the dependency. These behaviors can also occur with personality disorders. To evaluate the severity of the impairment, the examiner needs to assess whether there are (1) restrictions in activities of daily living; (2) difficulties in maintaining social functioning; (3) difficulties in completing tasks in a timely manner because of deficiencies in concentration, persistence, and pace; and (4) repeated episodes of decompensation and loss of adaptive functioning, averaging three times per year, with each episode lasting 2 or more weeks.

--break--
14.4e.2 Somatoform Pain Disorders
Pain that accompanies a medical impairment is generally taken into account in the impairment ratings throughout the Guides. Chronic pain and pain exceeding the anticipated amount are discussed in Chapter 18. Mental illness may distort the perception of pain. Pain may be part of a somatic delusion in an individual with a major depression or a psychotic disorder. Pain may become the object of an obsessive preoccupation, or it may be the chief complaint in a conversion disorder. A frequent problem in pain assessment is the failure of physicians to agree on whether there is an adequate physical explanation for the pain. It would be useful for the examining psychiatrist to understand whether other professionals treating the individual feel that his or her symptoms are out of proportion with the physical findings. If they are, the psychiatrist should consider this finding in making a differential diagnosis and should recognize the possibility of the presence of somatoform or other mental disorders.

The essential feature of somatoform pain disorder in DSM-IV is preoccupation with pain in the absence of physical findings that adequately account for the pain and its intensity, as well as the presence of psychological factors that are judged to have a major role in the onset, severity, exacerbation, and maintenance of pain. In the past, this syndrome has been called psychogenic pain disorder or idiopathic pain disorder, but these terms are often used more loosely to describe any complaint of pain that is greater than the physician expects for the average person who has the same physical findings. The physician should recognize that anxiety and depression almost always magnify pain, and vice versa.
-- chars 3187 --

The following guidelines may be useful in determining whether pain is a symptom of a mental impairment: (1) All possible somatic causes of the pain have been eliminated by careful, comprehensive medical examinations; (2) some significant emotional stressor has occurred in the individual’s life that may have acted as a triggering agent, and the stressor and the pain have occurred in a reasonable sequence; and (3) evidence exists of a mental disorder other than a conversion-related one, and the pain may be a symptom of nonconversion-related mental disorders. For example, delusional pain may occur in an individual who has a subtle paranoid disorder such as might be the case with someone who believes Martians are irradiating his head, producing constant headaches, and where the belief antedated the pain.

--break--
14.4e.3 Malingering
Malingering may arise with mental disorders as well as with nonpsychiatric conditions. Examiners should be aware of this possibility when evaluating impairments. The possibility of obtaining monetary awards and avoiding work increases the likelihood of malingering. Certain symptoms, such as headache, lowback pain, peripheral neuralgia, and vertigo, are difficult to objectively assess. Conditions that have more of an apparent organic basis, such as appendicitis, a fracture, or pregnancy, tend to be more amenable to objective diagnostic studies than are some psychiatric and neurologic complaints.
Malingerers with supposed psychiatric conditions may be seen in circumstances involving the avoidance of an unpleasant duty or requirement, such as going to jail or entering military service, and may be seen seeking insurance or entitlement benefits.

Rather than giving outright fabrications, individuals may consciously or unconsciously exaggerate the symptoms of a disorder in the clinical or impairment evaluation setting. Malingering may be suspected when the individual’s symptoms are vague, ill defined, overdramatized, inconsistent, or not in conformity with signs and symptoms known to occur. In this situation, results of the physical and mental status examinations and other data and information of the evaluation may be inconsistent with the nature and intensity of the person’s complaints.

Circumstances in which an unusual number of illdefined complaints occur in a circumscribed group, perhaps in a setting of poor morale or conflict, also may be viewed with suspicion. But the most appropriate approach for the examining physician is one of clinical neutrality, the application of standard interview and diagnostic procedures, and, if warning signs appear, a careful investigation that includes multidisciplinary evaluation and psychological testing as appropriate. For a more elaborate discussion of malingering, a text may be useful.7, 8

Table 14-2 Selected Impairments and Common Limitations in Ability

Impairment Schizophrenia

Schizophrenia or depression
Schizophrenia, depression, or anxiety disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder Borderline personality disorder Panic disorder with agoraphobia
-- chars 3066 --

Signs and Symptoms
Loosening of associations Delusions and hallucinations Flat affect
Inappropriate affect Bizarre behavior Disorganized behavior Social withdrawal; autism
Impaired concentration and attention

Decreased concentration Explosive outbursts Impulsivity
Affective lability Social withdrawal

Limitations in Ability
Social, vocational, and activities of daily living* Social, vocational, and activities of daily living Social
Social, vocational, and activities of daily living Social and vocational
Social, vocational, and activities of daily living Social and vocational
Social, vocational, and activities of daily living

Vocational
Social and vocational Social and vocational Social and vocational Social and vocational

--break--
14.5 Examples of
Impairment Due to Mental and Behavioral Disorders
The following cases indicate the information needed to accurately assess impairment and residual function.

Comment: An antidepressant once a day was begun, as was twice-weekly focal dynamic therapy with a time frame of 2 months. The man talked of his guilt about surviving all his male relatives (he had one older sister) and particularly his father, who had died when he was 14, leaving him “the stag in the house.” He resented his father’s dominant personality and his father’s push for him to be a scholar/athlete just like he had been. His father was a general surgeon. He envied and resented his father and was ambivalent about his death. He experienced his own MI as punishment for his resentment of his father and for his own success. As the antidepressant took effect and therapy elucidated his anger at his father, the guilt, as well as his fear of punishment and anxiety, diminished.
He resumed working a few hours a day, eventually returned to full practice, and resumed his sexual life as well. He stopped psychotherapy after 2 months but was to continue the antidepressant for 1 year to help prevent recurrence of the depression.

Axis IV: Rejection by job and boyfriend. Axis V: GAF of 50 to 60.
Impairment Rating: This woman would be rated as having no impairment noted on activities of daily living in Table 14-1. However, her social functioning is class 3, as is her concentration, and her adaptation would be considered class 5.
Comment: The class 5 adaptation rating is based on the woman’s inability to hold a job for longer than a few months due to her affective dyscontrol and impulsivity, as well as her inability to sustain any long-term relationships.
The following general format for impairment reports has been adapted from that recommended by the Social Security Administration.4 The content of the report may vary, depending on the system for which the report is being prepared. An impairment report based on the Guides also should include the main features of the Report of Medical Evaluation form shown in Chapter 2.

A. Introduction: The psychiatric or psychological examination report should show not only the individual’s signs, symptoms, laboratory findings (psychological test results), and diagnosis but also the effect of the emotional or mental disorder on his or her ability to function at the usual and customary level of personal, social, and occupational adjustment.
-- chars 3224 --
--break--
1. Specialty: The exam should be performed by a psychiatrist.
--break--
2. General Observations: Include in the report general observations of the following:
a. How the individual came to the examination.
(1) Alone or accompanied.
(2) Distance and mode of transportation.
(3) If by automobile, who drove?
b. General appearance:
(1) Dress.
(2) Grooming.
(3) Appearance of invalidism.
c. Attitude and degree of cooperation.
d. Posture and gait.
e. Involuntary movements.
--break--
3. Informant: The psychiatrist should identify the person providing the history (usually the examinee) and should provide an estimate of the reliability of the history.
--break--
4. Chief Complaint: This should include a detailed chronological account of the onset and progression of the current mental/emotional condition with special reference to the individual’s concerns.
a. Date and circumstances of onset of the condition.
b. Date the individual reported that the condition began to interfere with work, and how it interfered.
c. Date the individual reported inability to work because of the condition and the circumstances.
d. Attempts to return to work and the results.

e. Outpatient evaluations and treatment for mental/emotional problems, including:
(1) Name of treating sources.
(2) Dates of treatment.
(3) Type of treatment (name and dosage of medications, if prescribed).
(4) Response to treatment.
f. Hospitalizations for mental disorders, including:
(1) Names of hospitals.
(2) Dates of hospitalizations.
(3) Treatment and response.
g. Information concerning the individual’s:
(1) Activities of daily living.
(2) Social functioning.
(3) Ability to complete tasks timely and appropriately.
(4) Episodes of decompensation and their resulting effects.
--break--
5. Past History: This should include a longitudinal account of the individual’s personal life, including:
a. Relevant educational, medical, social, legal, military, marital, and occupational data and any associated problems in adjustment.
b. Details (dates, places, etc) of any past history of outpatient treatment and hospitalizations for mental/emotional problems.
c. History, if any, of substance abuse and/or treatment in detoxification and rehabilitation centers.
--break--
6. Mental Status: The individual case facts will determine the specific areas of mental status that need to be emphasized during the examination, but generally the report should include a detailed description of the individual’s:
a. Appearance, behavior, and speech (if not already described).
b. Thought process (eg, loosening of association).
c. Thought content (eg, delusion).
d. Perceptual abnormalities (eg, hallucinations).
e. Mood and affect (eg, depression, mania).
f. Sensorium and cognition (eg, orientation, recall, memory, concentration, scope of information, and intelligence).
g. Judgment and insight.
--break--
7. Diagnosis: American Psychiatric Association standard nomenclature as set forth in the current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.
-- chars 3021 --
--break--
8. Prognosis: Prognosis and recommendations for treatment, if indicated; also recommendations for any other medical evaluation (eg, neurologic, general physical) if indicated.
B.
Policy—Additional Requirements by Impairment
--break--
1. Schizophrenic, Delusional (Paranoid) Schizo-affective, and Other Psychotic Disorders: The report should reflect:
a. Periods of residence in structured settings such as halfway houses and group homes.
b. Frequency and duration of episodes of illness and periods of remission.
c. Side effects of medications.
--break--
2. Organic Mental Disorders: The report should reflect:
a. The source of the disorder, if known, the prognosis, and:
(1) Whether there is an acute or chronic process.
(2) Whether stable or progressive.
(3) Changes at various points in time.
b. The results of any psychological or neuropsychological testing that could serve to further document an organic process and its severity.
c. Information regarding the results of any neurologic evaluations.
d. Information about any neurologic testing (eg, EEG, CT scan) that may have been performed and the results, if available.
--break--
3. Mental Retardation
a. Current documentation of IQ by a standardized, well-recognized measure. Acceptable instruments will have a representative normative sample, a mean of approximately 100, and a standard deviation of approximately 15 in the general population, and will cover a broad range of cognitive and perceptual-motor functions (eg, the Wechsler scales).
b. Verbal performance and full-scale IQ scores, together with the individual subtest scores.
c. Interpretation of the scores and assessment of the validity of the obtained scores, indicating any factors that may have influenced the results, such as the individual’s attitude and degree of cooperation; the presence of visual, hearing, or other physical problems; and recent prior exposure to the same or a similar test.
d. Consistency of the obtained test results with the individual’s education, vocational background, and social adjustment, especially in the area of personal self-sufficiency.

================================================================================
Chapter 15:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Spine
15.1 Principles of Assessment
15.2 Determining the Appropriate Method for Assessment
15.3 Diagnosis-Related Estimates Method
15.4 DRE: Lumbar Spine
15.5 DRE: Thoracic Spine
15.6 DRE: Cervical Spine
15.7 Rating Corticospinal Tract Damage
15.8 Range-of-Motion Method
15.9 ROM: Lumbar Spine
15.10 ROM: Thoracic Spine
15.11 ROM: Cervical Spine
15.12 Nerve Root and/or Spinal Cord
15.13 Criteria for Converting Whole Person Impairment to Regional Spine Impairment
15.14 The Pelvis
15.15 Spine Evaluation Summary
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairments of the spine, including how they affect an individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living (ADL). The spine consists of four regions: the cervical, thoracic, lumbar and sacral vertebrae, and associated soft tissues including muscles, ligaments, disks, and neural elements. Impairments of the spine discussed in this chapter include lumbar, thoracic, cervical, spinal cord, and pelvic impairments.
-- chars 3308 --

The following revisions have been made for the fifth edition: (1) The use of the diagnosis-related estimate (DRE) and range-of-motion (ROM) methods has been modified, and applications are described in greater detail; (2) impairment is rated only when the individual has reached maximal medical improvement (MMI); (3) impairments within a DRE category encompass a range, with adjustments of up to 3%;
(4) spinal cord injury is evaluated according to the functional approach in the nervous system chapter;
(5) the “differentiators” in the fourth edition have been replaced by “objective findings” and are more specifically defined; and (6) alterations of motion segment integrity have been redefined to reflect current scientific knowledge.
As in the fourth edition,1 the DRE method is the primary method used to evaluate individuals with an injury. Use the ROM method when the impairment is not caused by an injury or when an individual’s condition is not well represented by a DRE category. The ROM method is also now used to evaluate individuals with an injury at more than one level in the same spinal region and in certain individuals with recurrent pathology. This approach addresses the difficulty of assigning these individuals to an appropriate DRE category. An exception, however, is individuals with corticospinal involvement who have been treated with decompression and multilevel fusions within the same region; they should be rated by the DRE method because assessing ROM in paralyzed individuals is difficult. Finally, the range-of-motion method should be used if statutorily mandated in a particular jurisdiction. A more detailed description of the applications of either method is provided in Section 15.2.

As stated in this edition, an individual with a spinal condition is rated only when the condition is stable (unlikely to change within the next year regardless of treatment), ie, when MMI has been reached (Chapter 1 and Glossary). The individual is evaluated based on medical findings that are present when MMI has been reached.

--break--
15.1 Principles of Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss
the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

The evaluation should include a comprehensive, accurate medical history; a review of all pertinent records; a comprehensive description of the individual’s current symptoms and their relationship to daily activities; a careful and thorough physical examination; and all findings of relevant laboratory, radiologic (imaging), electrodiagnostic, and ancillary tests. It is also essential that the rater include in the report a description of how the impairment was calculated. Because many ratings are reviewed by other physicians and nonmedical personnel, the explanation of the calculation will lead to a better understanding of the method used and the report will be considered more reliable and complete.
-- chars 3153 --
--break--
15.1
a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
-------INTRODUCTION START (History)-------
History
The history should be based primarily on the individual’s own statements rather than secondhand information. While the medical history should consider information from others, the physician should be cautious about using subjective information from medical records. It is not appropriate to question the individual’s integrity. If information from the individual is inconsistent with what is known about the medical condition, circumstances, or written records, the physician should report and comment on the inconsistencies.

The history must describe in detail the chief complaint and the quality, severity, anatomic location, frequency, and duration of symptoms, including pain, numbness, paresthesias, and weakness.
Document exacerbating and alleviating factors and the way in which the condition interferes with daily activities. The physician should elicit the history of when and how the condition started, any precipitating events or factors, and the relationship to any previous spine problems.2-4

The history should include the individual’s description, in his or her own words, of how the symptoms developed and the assumed cause. In addition, the response to treatment and the results of special studies that have been performed should be described.
The physician should either review available roentgenograms and other imaging studies personally or report the findings as being those of another reviewer (based on reports). A review of organ systems and of the general medical history can provide potentially helpful information, including complicating medical problems that can affect the diagnosis, treatment plan, prognosis, disability, etc.

Examination
Physical examination of nonmusculoskeletal areas (eg, nervous system) is discussed in other parts of the Guides. Since a targeted neurologic assessment is needed for individuals with back or neck problems, the physician must have a good grasp of basic neurologic examination techniques and principles. Guided by the history, the physician should focus on
spine-related physical findings, such as range of motion, reflexes, muscle strength and atrophy, sensory deficits, root tension signs, gait, and the need for assistive devices (Table 15-1). Range-of-motion measurements are discussed later in this chapter.

The physical examination of the spine must be placed in the context of the individual’s general health and condition. For findings such as atrophy, consider other possible explanations besides spine impairment, such as previous joint surgery or hypertrophy of the contralateral side from overuse. Other physical conditions may be present that influence motor and sensory function, ranges of motion, and sciatic nerve tension. Examination of associated systems (vascular, nervous) and follow-up of any possibly significant information from the history and physical examination will allow the physician to distinguish between spine-related findings and other abnormalities.2-4
-- chars 3064 --

The physician should record and discuss any physical findings that are inconsistent with the history.
Many physical findings are subjective, ie, potentially under the influence of the individual. It is important to appreciate this and not confuse such observations with truly objective findings.

It is not the purpose of this text to discuss in detail how the physical examination is performed; textbooks are available to cover that subject. A few aspects of particular value to the impairment evaluation will be discussed subsequently.

Thoracic Spine

Cervical Spine

Evaluation of Sciatic Nerve Tension Signs Sciatic nerve tension signs are important indicators of irritation of the lumbosacral nerve roots. While most commonly seen in individuals with a herniated lumbar disk, this is not always the case. In chronic nerve root compression due to spinal stenosis, tension signs are often absent. A variety of nerve tension signs have been described. The most commonly used is the straight leg raising test (SLR). When performed in the supine position, the hip is flexed with the knee extended. In the sitting position, with the hip flexed 90°, the knee is extended. The test is positive when thigh and/or leg pain along the appropriate dermatomal distribution is reproduced. The degree of elevation at which pain occurs is recorded.

Research indicates that the maximum movement of nerve roots occurs when the leg is at an angle of 20° to 70° relative to the trunk. However, this may vary depending on the individual’s anatomy. Further, the L4, L5, and S1 nerve roots are those that primarily change their length when straight leg raising is performed. Thus, pathology at higher levels of the lumbar spine is often associated with a negative SLR. Root tension signs are most reliable when the pain is elicited in a dermatomal distribution. Back pain on

SLR is not a positive test. Hamstring tightness must also be differentiated from posterior thigh pain due to root tension.

With time, spine-related symptoms usually improve, and a positive root tension (SLR) test is elicited only at the extremes of hip flexion (leg raising). While straight leg raising in disk herniation is a relatively sensitive test (72% to 97%), it is nonspecific (11% to 45%).5 Straight leg raising of the asymptomatic limb (eg, crossed SLR) that produces sciatica in the limb with symptoms (crossed positive) is a specific (85% to 100%) but less sensitive (23% to 42%) test.

Results of supine SLR can be further validated by recording the individual’s response to gentle dorsiflexion and plantar flexion of the ankle, and to internal and external rotation of the hip when the straightened leg is raised to the point where symptoms begin. Normally, ankle dorsiflexion and hip internal rotation increase the pain, and ankle plantar flexion and hip external rotation decrease the sciatica. Since sitting knee extension and supine hip flexion culminate in essentially identical positions, symptomatic responses to the two types of SLR should be similar, although the angle at which pain is elicited may vary.
-- chars 3090 --

The reverse SLR or femoral stretch test causes root tension of L2, L3, and L4 and may be a sign of disk herniations at the higher levels. This test has low sensitivity and specificity.
Neurologic Tests
Neurologic examination of the lower extremity should include measurement of knee and ankle reflexes and motor and sensory functions. Because over 90% of all nerve-related pathology in the lumbar spine occurs at the L3-4, L4-5, and L5-S1 levels, it is especially important to recognize the functions of the L4, L5, and S1 nerves (Table 15-2). The knee reflex is primarily a test of L4 nerve root function. Individuals with pathology at the L3-4 level may also have sensory changes in the L4 dermatome (Figure 15-1) and quadriceps weakness. L5 nerve root compression will often influence the strength of the extensor hallucis longus muscle, but other foot and ankle muscles can be affected as well, resulting in weakness in foot dorsiflexion and difficulty walking on the heels. The ankle reflex is primarily mediated by the S1 nerve root. Weakness in foot plantar flexion and difficulty with toe walking can also occur with S1 root compression. The Babinski sign and
the presence of clonus and hyperreflexia are important indicators of corticospinal tract involvement.

Changes in balance and gait pattern may also signify myelopathy.

A systematic neurologic examination can also localize the affected cervical nerve root (Table 15-2). The upper spine and extremity sensory dermatomes appear in Figure 15-2. The biceps (C5, partially C6), brachioradialis (C6), and triceps (C7) reflexes should
L4
be elicited. Weakness of the deltoid and biceps muscles implicates C5; wrist extensors C6; triceps, wrist flexors, and finger extensors C7; finger flexors C8; and intrinsics C8 and T1. Sensation can be grossly evaluated by touch and more precisely determined by pinprick, light touch, and a vibrating fork.
Dermatomal overlap is common.

Reflexes should always be compared between extremities and elicited several times to determine reproducibility. Importantly, reflexes once “lost” due to previous injury or disease rarely return. Strength should also be compared between extremities and may need repeat testing to determine effort and reproducibility.

--break--
15.1 b Description of Clinical Studies
General
The individual may have undergone a variety of special tests including electromyographic, cystometric, roentgenographic studies with or without dye, CT scans, and MRI studies with or without contrast. The physician should determine when, where, and by whom the studies were done, the findings, and who interpreted them. Whenever possible, the physician should personally review the studies and report agreement or disagreement with previous interpretations. A summary of the studies should be included as a separate paragraph or section.

While imaging and other studies may assist physicians in making a diagnosis, it is important to note that a positive imaging study in and of itself does not make the diagnosis. Several reports indicate approximately 30% of persons who have never had back pain will have an imaging study that can be interpreted as positive for a herniated disk, and 50% or more will have bulging disks. Further, the prevalence of degeneration changes, bulges, and herniations increases with advancing age.6-11 To be of diagnostic value, clinical symptoms and signs must agree with the imaging findings. In other words, an imaging test is useful to confirm a diagnosis, but an imaging result alone is insufficient to qualify for a DRE category. Individuals with electromyography (EMG) studies that are clearly positive support a diagnosis of radiculopathy and therefore qualify for at least DRE category III.14
-- chars 3745 --

Motion Segment Integrity
A motion segment of the spine is defined as two adjacent vertebrae, the intervertebral disk, the apophyseal or facet joints, and ligamentous structures between the vertebrae. The range of motion from segment to segment varies. In the upper cervical spine (occiput to C2), there is little flexionextension, while the lower cervical spine permits increasing flexion-extension movements from about 10° at C2 to C3 to about 20° at C5 to C6 and C6 to C7. Flexion-extension movements are about 4° in the upper thoracic spine, 6° in the midthoracic spine, and 12° in the lower thoracic spine segments. In the lumbar spine there is a gradual increase from about 12° at L1 to L2 to 20° at the L5 to S1 level.13

Lateral bending is 5° to 6° in the lower cervical spine and about 6° in the upper thoracic spine.
In the lumbar spine, lateral bending is greatest at L3 to L4, where it is about 8° to 9°. Axial rotation is 30° to 40° in each direction in the upper cervical spine, 5° to 6° in the lower cervical and upper thoracic spine, and minimal in the lumbar spine.

Throughout the spine, movements are coupled; this means that the primary motion in one direction always is accompanied by a secondary motion in another direction. For example, rotation is almost always combined with side bending. The dominant motions at both the lower cervical and entire lumbar spine, where most clinical pathology occurs, are flexion-extension.

Alteration of motion segment integrity can be either loss of motion segment integrity (increased translational or angular motion) or decreased motion resulting mainly from developmental changes, fusion, fracture healing, healed infection, or surgical arthrodesis. An attempt at arthrodesis may not necessarily result in a solid fusion, but it may significantly limit motion at a motion segment and qualify for alteration of motion segment integrity.

A line is drawn along the posterior bodies of the vertebrae below and above the motion segment in question on dynamic (flexion and extension), lateral roentgenograms of the spine. The distance between lines A and B and the distance between lines B and C at the level of the posteroinferior corner of the upper vertebral body are summed. A value greater than 2.5 mm in the thoracic spine, greater than 4.5 mm in the lumbar spine, and greater than 3.5 mm in the cervical spine qualifies as loss of structural integrity.

Motion of the individual spine segments cannot be determined by a physical examination but is evaluated with flexion and extension roentgenograms (see Figures 15-3a through 15-3c).13,14 Loss of motion segment integrity is defined as an anteroposterior motion of one vertebra over another that is greater than 3.5 mm in the cervical spine, greater than
--break--
2.5 mm in the thoracic spine, and greater than 4.5 mm in the lumbar spine (Figure 15-3a). Loss of motion segment integrity is also defined as a difference in the angular motion of two adjacent motion segments greater than 15° at L1-2, L2-3, and L3-4 and greater than 20° at L4 to L5. Loss of integrity of the lumbosacral joint is defined as angular motion between L5 and S1 that is greater than 25°. In the cervical spine, loss of motion segment integrity is defined as motion at the level in question that is more than 11° greater than at either adjacent level.
-- chars 3344 --

When routine x-rays are normal and severe trauma is absent, motion segment alteration is rare; thus, flexion and extension x-rays are indicated only when the physician suspects motion segment alteration from history or findings on routine x-rays.14
--break--
15.2
Determining the Appropriate Method for Assessment
Spinal impairment rating is performed using one of two methods: the diagnosis-related estimate (DRE) or range-of-motion (ROM) method.

The DRE method is the principal methodology used to evaluate an individual who has had a distinct injury.When the cause of the impairment is not easily determined and if the impairment can be well characterized by the DRE method, the evaluator should use the DRE method.

The ROM method is used in several situations:
--break--
1. When an impairment is not caused by an injury, if the cause of the condition is uncertain and the DRE method does not apply, or an individual cannot be easily categorized in a DRE class. It is acknowledged that the cause of impairment (injury, illness, or aging) cannot always be determined. The reason for using the ROM method under these circumstances must be carefully supported in writing.

Lines are drawn along the superior border of the vertebral body of the lower vertebrae and the superior border of the body of the upper vertebrae and the lines extended until they join. The angles are measured and subtracted. Note that lordosis (extension) is represented by a negative angle and kyphosis (flexion) by a positive angle. Loss of motion segment integrity is defined as motion greater than 15° at L1-2, L2-3, and L3-4 and greater than 20°
at L4 to L5. Loss of integrity of the lumbosacral joint is defined as angular motion between L5 and S1 that is greater than 25°. The flexion angle is +8° and the extension angle is –18°. Therefore (+8) – (–18) = +26° and would qualify for loss of structural integrity at any lumbar level.

Lines are drawn along the inferior borders of the two vertebral bodies adjacent to the level in question and of the vertebral bodies above and below those two vertebrae. Angles A, B, and C are measured on both flexion and extension x-rays and the measurements subtracted from one another. Note that lordosis (extension) is represented by a negative angle and kyphosis (flexion) is represented by a positive angle. Loss of motion segment integrity is defined as motion at the level in question that is more than 11° greater than at either adjacent level.

--break--
2. When there is multilevel involvement in the same spinal region (eg, fractures at multiple levels, disk herniations, or stenosis with radiculopathy at multiple levels or bilaterally).
--break--
3. Where there is alteration of motion segment integrity (eg, fusions) at multiple levels in the same spinal region, unless there is involvement of the corticospinal tract (then use the DRE method for corticospinal tract involvement).
--break--
4. Where there is recurrent radiculopathy caused by a new (recurrent) disk herniation or a recurrent injury in the same spinal region.
-- chars 3059 --
--break--
5. Where there are multiple episodes of other pathology producing alteration of motion segment integrity and/or radiculopathy.

The ROM method can also be used if statutorily mandated in a particular jurisdiction.

In the small number of instances in which the ROM and DRE methods can both be used, evaluate the individual with both methods and award the higher rating.

All spine impairment ratings shown in Tables 15-3 to 15-5 estimate whole person impairment. With both the DRE method and the ROM method, whole person function is regarded as 100%. For converting whole person to regional spine impairments, see Section 15.13. When two or more regions are impaired and rated by either the DRE or ROM method, the ratings should be combined using the Combined Values Chart, p. 604.

A flowchart of the spine impairment evaluation process is provided in Figure 15-4.

--break--
15.2 a Summary of Specific Procedures and Directions
--break--
1. Take a careful history, perform a thorough medical examination, and review all pertinent records and studies. This is helpful in determining the presence or absence of structural abnormalities, nerve root or cord involvement, and motion segment integrity.
--break--
2. Consider the permanency of the impairment, referring to Guides Chapter 1 and the Glossary for definitions as needed. If the impairment is resolving, changing, unstable, or expected to change significantly with or without medical treatment within 12 months, it is not considered a permanent (stable) impairment and should not be rated under the Guides criteria.
--break--
3.
Select the region that is primarily involved (ie, the lumbar, cervical, or thoracic spine) and identify the individual’s most serious objective findings.
--break--
4. Determine whether the individual has multilevel involvement or multiple recurrences/occasions within the same region of the spine. Use the ROM method if:
a. there are fractures at more than one level in a spinal region,
b. there is radiculopathy bilaterally or at multiple levels in the same spinal region,
c. there is multilevel motion segment alteration (such as a multilevel fusion) in the same spinal region, or
d. there is recurrent disk herniation or stenosis with radiculopathy at the same or a different level in the same spinal region; in this case, combine the ratings using the ROM method.

--break--
5. If the individual does not have multilevel involvement or multiple recurrences/occasions and an injury occurred, determine the proper DRE category. Most ratings will fall into categories I, II, or III. A corticospinal tract injury is evaluated according to Section 15.7.
--break--
6. If the individual has been treated with surgery or another modality, evaluate the results, extent of improvement, and impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living. If residual symptoms or objective findings impact the ability to perform ADL despite treatment, the higher percentage in each range should be assigned. If an individual had a prior condition, was asymptomatic, and now—at MMI—has symptoms that impact the ability to perform activities of daily living, the higher rating within a range may also be used. If ratings are increased, explicit documentation of the reasons for the increase should be included in the report.
-- chars 3308 --
--break--
7. If more than one spine region is impaired, determine the impairment of the other region(s) with the DRE method. Combine the regional impairments using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to express the individual’s total spine impairment.
--break--
8. From historical information and previously compiled medical data, determine if there was a preexisting impairment. Congenital, developmental, and other preexisting conditions may be differentiated from those attributable to the injury or illness by examining preinjury roentgenograms or by performing a bone scan after the onset of the condition.
--break--
9.
If requested, apportion findings to the current or prior condition, following jurisdiction practices and assuming adequate information is available on the prior condition. In some instances, to apportion ratings, the percent impairment due to previous findings can simply be subtracted from the percent based on the current findings. Ideally, use the same method to compare the individual’s prior and present conditions. If the ROM method has been used previously, it must be used again. If the previous evaluation was based on the DRE method and the individual now is evaluated with the ROM method, and prior ROM measurements do not exist to calculate a ROM impairment rating, the previous DRE percent can be subtracted from the ROM ratings. Because there are two methods and complete data may not exist on an earlier assessment, the apportionment calculation may be a less than ideal estimate.
--break--
10. For individuals with corticospinal tract involvement, refer to Table 15-6 for the appropriate impairment rating.

--break--
15.3 Diagnosis-Related Estimates Method

The DRE method has eight diagnosis-related categories for each of the three spinal regions. In assigning the individual to the correct DRE category, one of two approaches is used. The first is based on symptoms, signs, and appropriate diagnostic test results. The second is based on the presence of fractures and/or dislocations with or without clinical symptoms. If a fracture is present that places the individual into a DRE category, no other verification is required. The symptoms, signs other than fractures, and tests used to assist correct categorization of an individual are defined in Box 15-1.

To use the DRE method, obtain an individual’s history, examine the individual, review the results of appropriate diagnostic studies, and place the individual in the appropriate category. Although there are eight categories, almost all individuals will fall into one of the first three DRE categories. Altered motion segment integrity (ie, increased motion or loss of motion) qualifies the individual for category IV or V. A fracture and/or dislocation, with or without clinical symptoms, permits placement of the individual into a DRE category with no additional verification. If there are impairments in different spinal regions, rate each spinal region separately using the DRE method; then combine the ratings using the Combined Values Chart on page 604. As stated previously, fractures at more than one level in the same spinal region should be rated using the ROM method.
-- chars 3181 --

In most cases, using the definitions provided in Box 15-1, the physician can assign an individual to DRE category I, II, or III. An individual in category I has only subjective findings. In category II, the individual has objective findings but no radiculopathy or alteration of structural integrity, while in category III, radiculopathy with objective verification must be present. Since an individual is evaluated after having reached MMI, a previous history of objective findings may not define the current, ratable condition but is important in determining the course and whether

MMI has been reached. The impairment rating is based on the condition once MMI is reached, not on prior symptoms or signs.

If the individual had a radiculopathy caused by a herniated disk or lateral spinal stenosis that responded to conservative treatment and currently has no radicular symptoms or signs, he or she is placed in category II, since at MMI there is no radiculopathy. Category III is for individuals with a symptomatic radiculopathy, either after medical or surgical treatment, or for individuals who have a history of previous radiculopathy caused by disk herniation or lateral spinal stenosis but have improved or become asymptomatic following surgery.

The DRE method recommends that physicians document physiologic and structural impairments relating to injuries or diseases other than common developmental findings, such as (1) spondylolysis, found normally in 7% of adults; (2) spondylolisthesis, found in 3% of adults; (3) herniated disk without radiculopathy, found in approximately 30% of individuals by age 40 years; and (4) aging changes, present in 40% of adults after age 35 years and in almost all individuals after age 50.6,12 As previously noted, the presence of these abnormalities on imaging studies does not necessarily mean the individual has an impairment due to an injury.

In cases where the abnormalities discussed above are present on imaging studies and are known or assumed to have preexisted an injury being rated, physicians should acknowledge these antecedent conditions. If requested, physicians may need to assess whether the condition was previously symptomatic and whether any aggravation occurred as a result of the injury.
Physicians should be aware of the statutory definition in the involved jurisdiction pertaining to aggravation to ensure their use of the term is consistent with their state’s legal interpretation.

DRE categories are discussed in the following three sections.
--break--
15.4

: Lumbar Spine
The lumbar spine DRE categories are summarized in Table 15-3. Apart from category I, each category includes a range to account for the resolution or continuation of symptoms and their impact on the ability to perform ADL.

For thoracic spine problems localized to the thoracic region, use Table 15-4. If the thoracic pathology also leads to isolated bowel or bladder dysfunction not due to corticospinal damage, obtain the appropriate estimates for bowel and bladder dysfunction listed in the gastrointestional and urology chapters and combine these with the thoracic spine DRE category (I-V) listed in Table 15-4. If the thoracic spine problem is due to corticospinal tract involvement, use Section 15.7. If thoracic injury–related bowel or bladder symptoms exist without verifiable lower extremity involvement, then appropriate estimates for bowel and bladder impairments from the Guides chapters on the urinary and reproductive and digestive systems should be combined (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) with an impairment percent from one of the thoracic categories II through V.
-- chars 3632 --

The thoracic spine impairment DRE categories are summarized in Table 15-4.

--break--
15.6  DRE: Cervical Spine
--break--
15.6a Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Cervical Disorders
For cervical problems localized to the cervical or cervicothoracic region, use Table 15-5. If the cervical spine problem also leads to isolated bowel and/or bladder dysfunction not due to corticospinal damage, obtain the appropriate estimates for bowel and

bladder dysfunction from the gastrointestinal and urology chapters (Chapters 6 and 7) and combine these with the appropriate cervical spine DRE category from DRE I to V, listed in Table 15-5. If the cervical spine problem is due to corticospinal tract involvement, use Table 15-6 alone.

The DRE cervical categories are summarized in Table 15-5.

Figure 15-5 illustrates the relationship of nerve roots to the vertebral level.

The level at which nerve roots exit the spine relative to the vertebrae. The neurologic level of involvement is determined by identifying the lowest normally functioning nerve root.

In prior editions of the Guides, rating spinal cord injury was done either through a combination of DRE categories or in the nervous system chapter. It was decided in this edition to evaluate spinal cord injuries based on the criteria in the nervous system chapter (Chapter 13). These criteria are repeated in this section. For bilateral neurologic or corticospinal tract damage, consultation with a spinal cord injury specialist and review of Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System, is recommended. Thus, for an individual with a spinal cord injury affecting the upper extremities, use Table 15-6 and the appropriate impairment rating for impairment of one or both upper extremities. For impairments involving loss of use of the lower extremities, use the section in Table 15-6 pertaining to station and gait impairment. If there is additional bowel or bladder dysfunction, combine the upper extremity or lower extremity loss with impairments in bladder, anorectal, and/or neurologic sexual impairment as warranted.

Once a class has been selected, the exact value is obtained by combining the value with the corresponding additional impairment from DRE categories II through V for cervical and lumbar impairment and DRE categories II through IV for thoracic impairment. An exact value is determined based on the degree of impairment of ADL. Table 15-6 and the following examples illustrate the method for impairment rating of spinal cord injury.

All impairment estimates shown in the tables of this section are expressed as whole person impairments. Section 15.13 explains how to express a whole person spine impairment as a regional spine impairment. Tables 15-8 through 15-14 provide estimates for rating ankylosis and range of motion, while neurologic impairments are rated based on Tables 15-15 through 15-18. The data on standards and normal functioning described in this section are based on both medical studies and consensus judgments.15,18-27
-- chars 3025 --

As previously stated (Section 15.2) the ROM method should be used only (1) if the DRE method is not applicable (no verifiable injury); (2) if, after obtaining the history and performing the examination, the physician cannot place the individual within a multilevel DRE category; (3) if multilevel involvement and/or alteration of motion segment integrity has occurred in the same spinal region; (4) if there is recurrent radiculopathy caused by a new (recurrent) disk herniation or a recurrent injury in the same spinal region; (5) if there are multiple episodes of other pathology producing alteration of motion segment integrity and/or radiculopathy; or (6) if statutorily mandated by the involved jurisdiction.

Concerns have been raised by users of the Guides regarding perceived ageand gender-related variations in the normal population, which may bias impairments in favor of males or older individuals, both of whom are perceived to be less flexible and therefore may be judged “impaired” even under normal circumstances. Since preparation of the fourth edition, some scientific evidence has accumulated and several relevant articles have been identified.27-45

Regarding gender, the scientific evidence is inconsistent. The majority of studies actually show a nonsignificant trend toward greater motion for male normal individuals in each age group. The only movement showing any statistically significant gender difference is cervical extension, and then only in younger women. This finding is inconsistent among various studies, however, and the difference disappears with advancing age.35,41

There is a decrease in normal motion with advancing age, but the effect is not linear. Most studies examining a wide spectrum of age groups find greater alterations in mobility below 20 and above 60 years of age. Several studies suggest that lifestyle factors may influence flexibility far more than inherent factors, as the variability of overall motion between individuals increases with advancing years. However, the evidence is inconsistent, and the changes in normative data too small for the most relevant age groups 20 to 59, to warrant age adjustment in this edition of the Guides.

--break--
15.8 a General ROM Method Measurement Principles
Impairment should be evaluated when the condition has stabilized after completion of all necessary medical, surgical, and rehabilitative treatment. This principle precludes rating an acute illness or injury. For example, if acute muscle spasm is present, this should be noted in the examiner’s report; however, the mobility measurements would not be valid for estimating permanent impairment. Because the Guides only considers permanent impairment, rating should be deferred until after any acute exacerbation of the chronic condition has subsided, ie, when the individual is at MMI (see Chapter 1 and the Glossary).

Pain, fear of injury, disuse, or neuromuscular inhibition may limit mobility by diminishing the individual’s effort, leading to inaccurately low and inconsistent measurements. The physician should seek consistency when testing active motion, strength, and sensation. Tests with inconsistent results should be repeated. Results that remain inconsistent should be disregarded. When the physiologic measurements fail to match known pathology, they should be repeated and, if still inconsistent, disallowed until documented evidence is provided for the abnormalities noted on the physical examination.
-- chars 3471 --

The reproducibility (precision) of an individual’s performance is one (but not the sole) indicator of optimum effort. When measuring range of motion, the examiner should obtain at least three consecutive measurements and calculate the mean (average) of the three. Measurements should not change substantially with repeated efforts. If the average is less than 50°, three consecutive measurements must fall within 5° of the mean; if the average is greater than 50°, three consecutive measurements must fall within 10% of the mean. Motion testing may be repeated up to six times to obtain three consecutive measurements that meet these criteria. If after six measurements inconsistency persists, the spinal motions are considered invalid. The measurements and accompanying impairment estimates may then be disallowed, in part or in their entirety.

There are multiple potential sources of error in a quantitative physical examination.17,20,21 The greatest source of error that occurs is due to test administrator inexperience or lack of knowledge. The evaluator should also ensure adequate warm-up movements have been performed.16 When possible, the individual being evaluated should warm up prior to the ROM measurements: flexion and extension twice, left and right rotation twice, left and right lateral bending twice, and one additional flexion and extension. The warm-up movements do not need to be repeated before each subsequent test of motions of the same spinal region.

The physician also needs to ensure the anatomical landmarks are accurate, the body part is stabilized, the measurement device is properly stabilized on the spine, and appropriate instructions are provided to the individual.17,20,21 If these principles are followed, errors due to examination technique, the measurement device itself, or normal human variability will be minimized.

--break--
15.8 b Principles of Inclinometry and Spine Motion Measurement
Since spinal motion is compound, it is essential to measure simultaneously motion of both the upper and lower extremes of the spine region being examined. Because the small joints of the spine do not lend themselves readily to two-arm goniometric measurements and measuring a spine segment’s mobility is confounded by motion above and below the assessed points, an inclinometer is the preferred device for obtaining accurate, reproducible measurements in a simple, practical, and inexpensive way.
The subcutaneous bony structures that mark the upper and lower ends of the three spine regions can be palpated readily.

Inclinometers, also called angle finders or level indicators, are small angle-measuring devices traditionally used by carpenters, mechanics, and tradespeople. Recently, physicians, therapists, and veterinarians have used them to measure angles and ranges of motion in humans and animals. Inclinometers work like a plumb line, operating on the principle of gravity, which is a constant. An inclinometer used by a physician should be marked off in 2° increments or less and in good operating condition (Figure15-6). A mechanical inclinometer has a starting or 0° position indicated by a weighted needle or pendulum. A fluid level can cause errors in reading the meniscus. A fluid-filled inclinometer should allow rotation of its inclinometer face so any number on the face can be set as the initial position. Electronic inclinometers use gravity sensors to determine an angle from the vertical, and then perform internal calculations.21
-- chars 3486 --

Features of a properly designed inclinometer for medical use include a dial large enough to allow easy reading of 2° increments but small enough to enable application on the spine and all joints of the body; features to enable repeated, accurate application and stabilization of the instrument on the body; and a dial that can both display the 0° gravity position and be set by the examiner to a 0° starting position when the body part cannot be placed in a 0° gravity or neutral position.

Box 15-2 offers a partial list of companies that produce or distribute inclinometers. The American Medical Association does not endorse or recommend any particular type or brand of inclinometer.

The following principles, discussed in greater detail by Mayer,17 by Gerhardt et al,20,21 and in forthcoming AMA educational material, are important to follow to obtain accurate measurements.

Gravitational plane. An inclinometer works only in the vertical position because only that plane allows the pointer or sensor to move freely in response to gravity. An inclinometer will not operate properly if tilted or at all when horizontal. Therefore, the individual being examined must be in a position that permits motion of the part being tested in a vertical plane. For spinal measurements in the sagittal and frontal (coronal) planes the individual should be standing or sitting, with the spine vertical (Figure
--break--
15-7). Measurements in the transverse or axial plane must be made with the individual in the supine, prone, or flexed hip position.

Measure spinal ROM in three principal planes: sagittal (extension-flexion), frontal or coronal, and transverse or axial (rotation) (Figure 15-7). If a spinal region has two or more impaired motions, the ratings for each range of motion impairment are added.
Impairments of two or more regions of the spine are
combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

Stabilization. If the caudad (superior), or lower, part of a spine region can be stabilized so it does not move when the superior, or upper, part moves, a single mechanical inclinometer may be used, as with measuring cervical rotation (see Figure 15-17).
However, two inclinometers are usually needed to measure most movements of the spine. Single electronic inclinometers use microprocessors to duplicate functions of mechanical inclinometers. Their use
will not be described in detail here as information is available from the manufacturer. The user should ensure that the features described above are addressed.

--break--
15.8c Ankylosis and Motion With Ankylosis
Ankylosis is defined as the complete absence of joint motion and is expressed as a fixed position. In the spine, which has multiple motion segments in each region with vertebrae moving together and separately, complete absence of regional motion is rare. For spine impairment evaluation only, when an individual cannot reach the neutral (0°) position, the position or angle of restriction closest to neutral is considered the position of ankylosis or end-restricted movement.
-- chars 3050 --

If the individual has end-restricted movement, this value, taken as the ankylosis value, is used to determine impairment instead of the ROM. If the motion crosses the neutral position in any plane, the examiner should use the abnormal motion section of the appropriate table to determine the impairment for that plane.

S: sagittal plane, T: transverse plane, F: frontal or coronal plane.

Manual pressure during use. The inclinometer should be held so it remains firmly applied to the subcutaneous skeletal structure while the spine is moving through the entire range of motion. It must not deviate from the original position because of skin movement or uneven pressure on the skin overlying the bony landmark, which might occur with an obese individual. The inclinometer design is important to allow proper application and avoid slippage on subcutaneous bony prominences. Firm contact of two points of the instrument with the structure is essential, especially if a convex surface such as the sacrum or calvarium (top of the head) is involved.

Recording ROM Measurements
ROM measurements can be recorded on the summary sheets (Figures 15-10, 15-15, and 15-18).

In determining ankylosis impairments, the examiner should add the ankylosis impairments in several planes within a single region or combine the ankylosis impairments of two or more regions (Combined Values Chart, p. 604). If a spinal region has several range-of-motion impairments and an ankylosis impairment, the ROM impairments are added and the total is combined with the ankylosis impairment.
Impairments of two or more regions are always combined (Combined Values Chart).

--break--
15.8d Estimating Whole Person Impairment Using the ROM Method
--break--
1. Determine whether the individual has reached MMI and the impairment is stable. If the condition is changing or likely to improve substantially with medical treatment, the impairment is not permanent and should not be rated. If it is permanent, proceed to step 2.
--break--
2. Select the impaired region: cervical, thoracic, or lumbar.
--break--
3. Use Table 15-7 to determine the percentage impairment for the part of the ROM diagnosis– based method. If there are two or more diagnoses within a spinal region, use that which is most significant. This percent will be combined with those for the impaired range(s) of motion and the whole person neurologic deficit (steps 7-9 below).

--break--
4. Measure the range of motion in the relevant sagittal, frontal (coronal), and transverse planes (Figure 15-7), and determine any angle of ankylosis or any restricted motion that is present.
--break--
5. Perform at least three measurements of each motion. Determine which measurements meet reproducibility criteria described under general measurement principles described in Section
--break--
15.8b. Calculate the average of each set of three measurements and determine whether the three measurements in each set fall within 5° or 10% of the mean, whichever is larger.
-- chars 3002 --
--break--
6. If the measurements do not meet the consistency requirements described in step 5, perform additional tests until the reproducibility criteria are satisfied, up to a maximum of six. If the test results remain inconsistent after six measurements, repeat the tests at a later date or disallow impairment related to that motion.
--break--
7. Use the maximum motion from a reproducible set of measurements to determine any impairment rating from the appropriate tables, based on the spinal region and type of movement. Refer to Section 15.8c, Ankylosis and Motion With Ankylosis, if there are several range-ofmotion or ankylosis impairments in a region. For example, an individual who can flex the cervical spine from 30° to 60° but who lacks 30° of motion in reaching the neutral 0° position has restricted end motion and the same estimated impairment as if he or she had fixed ankylosis at 30° of cervical flexion. According to Table 1512, the individual’s impairment is 30% of the whole person. If there are impairments due to loss of motion in more than one plane in the same spinal region (extension, flexion, or rotation), the impairments are added to determine total impairment due to loss of motion in a spinal region.
--break--
8. Determine any impairments due to neurologic deficits, such as radiculopathy or spinal nerve injury. Refer to Table 15-15 for the procedure to evaluate the sensory deficit. Use Table 15-16 to determine the procedure for estimating loss of strength. Apply these tables to Table 15-17 (cervical and thoracic nerve roots) or Table 15-18 (lumbar and sacral nerve roots) as needed. Convert the neurologic impairments, initially calculated as upper or lower extremity, into a whole person impairment.
--break--
9.
Combine the diagnosis-based (Table 15-7) and physical examination–based (mobility and neurologic) impairment percents using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
--break--
10. Repeat steps 1 through 9 for either of the other two spinal regions with significant involvement related to the primary diagnosis.
--break--
11. Combine the regional impairments into a single whole person impairment using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
--break--
12. Combine the whole person spine impairment with whole person ratings for any other organ system using the Combined Values Chart, if indicated.
--break--
13. Record the results of the evaluation on the Spine Impairment Summary form (see Table 15-20).

Instructions for Using Table 15-7
--break--
1. Use this table only when the ROM method is used.
--break--
2. Identify the most significant (impairing) diagnosis of the primarily involved region (lumbar, thoracic, or cervical).
--break--
3. The diagnosis-based impairment percent should be combined with range-of-motion impairment estimates and whole person impairment estimates involving sensation, weakness, and other conditions of the musculoskeletal, nervous, or other organ systems.
--break--
4. Combine the diagnosis-based, range-of-motion, and other whole person impairment estimates using the Spine Impairment Summary form (Table 15-20).
-- chars 3086 --
--break--
5. Repeat for other involved spine regions and combined regional impairments if those exist.

† Structural tests include radiographs, myelograms with and without CT scan, CT scan and MRI with and without contrast, and diskogram with and without CT scan.

--break--
15.9  ROM: Lumbar Spine
--break--
15.9 a Flexion and Extension
Two-Inclinometer Technique
--break--
1. Provide information about the test and allow warm-up within pain tolerance. Warm-up exercises, as described in Section 15.8a, are done as tolerated by the individual, based on physician judgment.
--break--
2. The individual should be standing with knees extended and weight balanced on both feet, ideally with hands on hips for support to permit greater motion. The spine should be in the neutral position while the inclinometers are set at 0° (See Figure 15-8a). Locate and place horizontal skin marks

over the T12 spinous process and the sacrum. Center the first inclinometer aligned in the sagittal plane, over the mark for the T12 spinous process. Center the second inclinometer over the sacral horizontal mark. It is generally best to place the sacral mark at the midpoint of the posterior superior iliac spine because if the mark is placed too high on the sacral convexity, the inclinometer may be displaced during extension. Be certain of the bony landmarks.
--break--
3. Instruct the individual to flex the trunk as far as possible (Figure 15-8b), again recording both inclinometer angles and subtracting the sacral (hip) from the T12 inclinometer angle to obtain true lumbar flexion angle. Ask the individual to return the trunk to the neutral position.

--break--
4. Ask the individual to extend maximally while holding the inclinometers firmly, and record both angles (Figure 15-8c). Subtract the sacral (hip) inclination from the T12 inclinometer angle to obtain the true lumbar extension angle. Return the trunk to the neutral position (verify that the inclinometers are still at 0°).
--break--
5. Repeat the procedure at least three times and at most six times for flexion and extension to obtain a valid measurement set (three consecutive, reproducible measurements). Only the true lumbar spine flexion and extension angles need to be consistently measured within 5° if the average is less than 50°, or within 10° if the average is greater than 50°. The impairment is based on the maximum true extension and flexion angles from within the three measurements. The average of the three is only used to determine consistency.
--break--
6. An accessory validity test can be performed for lumbosacral flexion and extension.35 In this test, record the straight-leg-raising angle of the supine individual by placing an inclinometer on each tibial crest with the knees extended and the hip flexed (Figure 15-8d). Compare the straight-leg-raising angle to the sum of the sacral flexion and extension (sacral or hip motion) angles (Figures 15-9a and 15-9c). If the straight-leg-raising angle exceeds the sum of sacral flexion and extension angles by more than 15°, the lumbosacral flexion test is invalid. Normally, the straight-leg-
-- chars 3118 --
raising angle is about the same as the sum of the sacral flexion-extension angle. If the individual resists passive SLR without other evidence of radiculopathy, the accessory test is also invalid. If invalid, the examiner should either repeat the flexion-extension test or disallow impairment for lumbosacral spine flexion and extension.

Tightest SLR – [sacral flexion + sacral extension]
? 15° for validity (assumes sacral flexion and extension are less than normal).

Note: This accessory validity test is useful only when sacral flexion plus extension is less than the average for normal individuals (ie, 65° for women and 55° for men). At these levels or above, the difference between sacral motion and supine straight leg raising will usually exceed 15° because the hamstring and gluteal muscles are contracted in the standing flexed position and relaxed in the supine position. However, below the threshold of 65° for women and 55° for men, the tightest supine straight-leg-raising angle should not be more than 15° greater than the combined sacral (hip) flexion and extension angle in the standing position.

a. neutral position
b. lateral bending

--break--
4. Instruct the individual to bend the trunk to the right as far as possible (Figure 15-9b), again recording both inclinometer angles and subtracting the sacral (hip) angle from the T12 inclinometer angle to obtain the lumbar right lateral bending angle. Ask the individual to return to the neutral position.
--break--
5. Repeat the procedure at least three times per side. To be valid, three of six consecutive measurements must lie within 5° or 10% of the mean, whichever is greater. The impairment estimate is based on the highest (least impairing) angle of a valid set. The mean is used only for a test of reproducibility.

With measurements for left and right lateral bending and any ankylosis, use Table 15-9 to determine the whole person impairment.

Add the impairments within the lumbar region. If other regions are impaired, the lumbar impairment should be combined with the other region impairment using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

Physical Exam: Measured T12 angles for left lateral bending are 20°, 20°, 30°, and 25°. Corresponding sacral (hip) lateral flexion measurements to the right are 15°, 5°, 10°, and 10°. Subtracting the sacral bending measurements, the true lumbosacral left lateral flexion angles are 5°, 15°, 20°, and 15°, respectively. The first measurement is discarded, being more than 5° less than the mean of 13.75°, but the next three measurements fulfill reproducibility criteria. The best left lateral bending angle is 20°.
Diagnosis: Chronic low back pain.
Impairment Rating: 1% impairment due to loss of left lateral bending (Table 15-9). Obtain the other ROM measurements for the lumbar spine and add the ROM impairments.

Ankylosis
Ankylosis in lumbar spine lateral bending (flexion) is generally associated with a scoliosis and usually produces only limited impairment. Mark the T12 and spinous process and sacrum, and ask the individual to stand in the most erect position possible that corrects the deformity. Using measurements made in the frontal (coronal) plane, subtract the sacral (hip) inclination from the T12 inclination and record the ankylosis angle or the angle of restriction (closest to the 0° neutral position). Consult Table 15-9 for the impairment rating.
-- chars 3388 --

--break--
15.10 ROM: Thoracic Spine
--break--
15.10 a Flexion and Extension
Thoracic flexion and extension are relatively limited motions. The amount of extension is determined mainly by the individual’s posture and the degree of fixed kyphosis or curvature of the thoracic spine. To determine the ranges of motion of this region, the individual is measured in the military brace posture to obtain the angle of extension or minimum kyphosis. Then, with the individual fully flexing the thoracic spine, the flexion angle is determined. The angle of minimum kyphosis is actually a measure of ankylosis, and impairment resulting from deformity corresponding to this angle is found in the Ankylosis part of Table 15-10.

Two-Inclinometer Technique
--break--
1. Provide information to the individual, and allow for the appropriate warm-up exercises. Measurements are obtained with the individual standing or sitting.
--break--
2. Locate and place horizontal skin marks over the T1 and T12 spinous processes. Place both inclinometers, which do not show gravity 0 automatically against a true vertical surface, such as a wall, and set the neutral 0° positions. Place the inclinometers over the T1 and T12 spinous processes while instructing the individual to maintain the maximally extended military brace posture position (Figures 15-11a and 15-11c). Subtract the T12 inclinometer reading from the T1 inclinometer reading (if both are inclined in the same direction from the vertical) to obtain the angle of minimum kyphosis. If T12 and T1 are inclined in opposite directions from the vertical, add the angles. Find the impairment percent in the Ankylosis part of Table 15-10.
--break--
3.
Set the inclinometers to 0° with the individual standing in the erect military brace posture. Then ask the individual to fully flex the thoracic spine. Flexing at the hips is permitted. Subtract the T12 inclinometer reading from the T1 reading obtained in step 1 above to obtain the angle of thoracic flexion (Figures 15-11b and 15-11d).
--break--
4. Repeat either the sitting or the standing test up to six times to obtain three measurements within 5° of the mean or 10%, whichever is greater.
--break--
5. A reproducibility test is done after a positional change, having the standing individual sit or vice versa. If the initial measurements were made standing, seat the individual on a stool, record the neutral 0° position, and ask him or her to flex the thoracic spine maximally from the military brace position. The thoracic flexion sitting angle should be nearly identical to the flexion angle obtained in the erect position.
--break--
6. Consult the Abnormal Motion part of Table 15-10 to determine the whole person impairment.

Ankylosis
The angle of minimum kyphosis of the thoracic spine may be considered equal to the angle of ankylosis. Excessive kyphosis or thoracic lordosis is evaluated as an impairment according to Table 15-10.

--break--
15.10b Rotation
Two-Inclinometer Technique
--break--
1. Provide information to the individual about the procedure and allow for appropriate warm-up exercises.
-- chars 3101 --
--break--
2. The individual should be seated or standing, whichever is more comfortable, and in a forward flexed position, with the thoracic spine in as horizontal a position as can be achieved (Figure 1512a). Locate and place horizontal skin marks over the T1 and T12 spinous processes. The trunk should be in the neutral position for rotation. The inclinometers are set to 0 by placement against a flat, horizontal table or floor if they do not automatically indicate gravity 0°. Place the first inclinometer aligned vertically in the transverse (axial) plane over the T1 spinous process while holding the second over the T12 spinous process.
--break--
3. Ask the individual to rotate the trunk maximally to the left and record both angles (Figure 15-12b). Subtract the T12 angle from the T1 angle to obtain the thoracic left rotation angle. Return the trunk to the neutral position (Figure 15-12a).
--break--
4. Instruct the individual to rotate the trunk maximally to the right, again recording both inclinometer angles; subtract the T12 angle from the T1 angle to obtain the thoracic right rotation angle.
--break--
5. Repeat the procedure three to six times per side to obtain a valid set of three consecutive measurements. The angles of a valid set should be within 5°or 10% of the mean of the set, whichever is greater. The final impairment percent is based on the best (least impairing) angle measured.

Using the best angle of rotation and Table 15-11, determine the whole person impairment.
b. rotation

The figure shows the individual standing. The inclinometers are

If ankyloses in several planes are present, combine the ankylosis estimates (Combined Values Chart), then combine the result with the range-of-motion impairment.

--break--
15.11 ROM: Cervical Spine
--break--
15.11a Flexion and Extension
Two-Inclinometer Technique
--break--
1. Provide information to the individual about the procedure, and allow for appropriate warm-up exercises.
--break--
2. Locate and place a horizontal skin mark over the T1 spinous process. With the individual seated, place the first inclinometer, aligned in the sagittal plane, over the T1 spinous process. Place the second inclinometer at the side of the face, from the corner of the eye to the ear, along a parallel line where the temple of eyeglasses would sit (Figure 15-15a). From this position, set the inclinometer to 0. This represents the 0° true neutral position. Move the second inclinometer to the calvarium, and set the head to the neutral position in both the sagittal and frontal planes, where the inclinometer again reads 0 (Figure 15-15a).

--break--
3. Ask the individual to flex maximally and record both angles. Subtract the T1 angle from the calvarium angle to obtain the cervical flexion angle (Figure 15-15b) and record it. Return the head
to the neutral position so both inclinometers read 0° again.
--break--
4. Instruct the individual to extend the neck as far as possible, keeping the chin close to the sternum, again recording both inclinometer angles. Subtract the T1 angle from the calvarium angle to obtain the cervical extension angle (Figure 15-15c). Ask the individual to return the head to the neutral position.
-- chars 3202 --
--break--
5. Repeat the procedure three times. The cervical flexion and extension angles should be consistently measured within 5° or 10%, whichever is greater. The impairment rating is based on the greatest angle of a valid set of three consecutive measurements.
--break--
6. Using the largest valid cervical flexion and extension measurements, obtain the whole person impairment rating for cervical flexion and extension using Table 15-12.
--break--
7. Add the cervical flexion and extension impairment ratings and combine the sum with any ratings for diagnostic criteria (Table 15-7) and/or neural impairment.

Ankylosis
--break--
1. Note whether there is motion of the cervical spine in the sagittal plane or whether the spine is unable either to flex or extend beyond the neutral point. Determine if the ankylosis or restricted motion is in flexion or extension. If some motion is possible in the sagittal plane, ask the individual to hold the position closest to the neutral point.
--break--
2. Place the inclinometer’s base against a vertical surface to set the inclinometer to the neutral 0 position. Then place it at the side of the face, from the corner of the eye to the ear, along a parallel line where eyeglass temples would lie (Figure 1515b). Move the inclinometer to the calvarium and set the head to the neutral position in both the sagittal and frontal planes, where the inclinometer again reads 0 (Figure 15-15b).
--break--
3. Place the second inclinometer at T1 and record the angle. Subtract or add the T1 angle from the first-read angle to obtain the angle of ankylosis in either flexion or extension.
--break--
4. Consult the Ankylosis section of Table 15-12 to determine the whole person impairment.
--break--
5. Add the impairment percent for left rotation and right rotation. Their sum is the whole person impairment contributed by abnormal rotation of the cervical region.

--break--
3. Determine whether the individual has cervical lateral motion or is unable to attain the neutral position. If there is motion and the individual cannot reach the neutral position, read the angle closest to neutral 0. This is the angle of ankylosis used for rating (Figure 15-16b).

Consult the Ankylosis section of Table 15-13 to determine the whole person impairment.

--break--
15.12 Nerve Root and/or Spinal Cord
When using the ROM method, it is important to consider any nerve root or spinal cord impairment.
Injury or illness to the cervical spine may produce nerve root compression manifested by sensory or motor loss in the upper extremities, as well as long tract signs from spinal cord compression. In the thoracic spine, spinal cord compression or injury may produce long tract signs, but nerve roots are uncommonly compressed. In the lumbosacral spine, spinal cord involvement is rare because the cord typically ends at L1, although nerve root compression (cauda equina or isolated root[s]) affecting the lower extremities is common. If any neural impairment is identified, proceed with the following evaluation:
-- chars 3037 --
--break--
1. Identify the nerve(s) involved, based on the clinical evaluation and the dermatome distribution charts for the lower (Figure 15-1) and upper extremity (Figure 15-2).
--break--
2. Determine the extent of any sensory and motor loss due to nerve impairment, based on Tables 15-15 and 15-16.
--break--
3. Find the maximum impairment due to nerve dysfunction in Table 15-17 for the upper extremity and Table 15-18 for the lower extremity.
--break--
4. Multiply the severity of the sensory or motor deficit by the maximum value of the relevant nerve (Tables 15-17, 15-18). If there is both sensory and motor impairment of a nerve root, the impairment percents are combined (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine the extremity impairment. If both extremities are impaired, the impairment percent for each extremity is determined, converted to whole person impairment, and the two impairment ratings combined using the Combined Values Chart.

--break--
5. Convert to whole person impairment by multiplying the upper extremity impairment by 0.6 and the lower extremity impairment by 0.4. To convert any regional ROM spine impairment to whole person impairment, multiply the specific spinal nerve impairment by the regional weight: 0.80 for the cervical spine, 0.40 for the thoracic spine, and 0.90 for the lumbosacral spine. Impairment ratings above 100% are rounded down to 100% since a whole person impairment rating cannot exceed 100%. This is described further in Section 15.14.

If there is bilateral spinal nerve impairment or spinal cord involvement, especially if in conjunction with head injury, consultation with a neurologist and/or neurosurgeon and review of the diagnostic criteria in the neurology chapter (Chapter 13) is advisable. The physician should decide whether evaluation by the spine or neurology chapter criteria is most appropriate.

--break--
15.13 Criteria for
Converting Whole Person Impairment to Regional Spine Impairment
In some instances, the evaluator may be asked to express an impairment rating in terms of the involved spine region rather than the whole person. This is done by dividing the whole person impairment estimate by the percent of spine function that has been assigned to that region. Under the DRE method, a whole person estimate being converted to a regional estimate would be divided by 0.35 for the cervical spine, 0.20 for the

thoracic spine, and 0.75 for the lumbar and sacral spines. Under the ROM method, a whole person estimate being converted to a regional estimate should be divided by 0.80 for the cervical spine, 0.40 for the thoracic spine, or 0.90 for the lumbosacral spine (Figure 15-19). For example, a 24-year-old female office worker sustained a cervical injury that, after it was healed and stable, resulted in a whole body impairment, estimated by the DRE method, of 20%.
Dividing the 20% by 0.35 results in 57% impairment of the cervical spine. An individual with multiple lumbar compression fractures was rated 25% whole body impairment by the ROM method. To obtain an estimate of lumbar spine impairment, the physician should divide the 25% by 0.9, resulting in a 27.7% rounded up to 28% lumbar spine impairment. Any values that exceed 100% are rounded down to 100% regional impairment.
-- chars 3269 --

--break--
15.14 The Pelvis
Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Pelvic Injury
The pelvis is composed bilaterally of three bones: the ilium, the ischium, and the pubis, forming a ringlike structure. Each ilium is attached to the sacrum via the sacroiliac synchondrosis. The pelvis, including the symphysis pubis, assists in transfer
of body weight to the lower extremities. In females, the pelvic structure and function are also of paramount importance in pregnancy and delivery.

The whole spine divided into regions indicating the maximum whole person impairment represented by a total impairment of one region of the spine. Lumbar 90%, thoracic 40%, cervical 80%.

Pelvic disorders are evaluated using Table 15-19. When necessary, these disorders may be combined with impairment ratings from either the DRE or ROM methods for spine impairment.

The impairment estimate for hemipelvectomy is 50% of the whole person (Table 17-32).

--break--
15.15 Spine Evaluation Summary
See Table 15-20 for a spine evaluation summary form.

================================================================================
Chapter 16:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Upper Extremities
16.1 Principles of Assessment
16.2 Amputations
16.3 Sensory Impairment Due to Digital Nerve Lesions
16.4 Evaluating Abnormal Motion
16.5 Impairment of the Upper Extremities Due to Peripheral Nerve Disorders
16.6 Impairment of the Upper Extremities Due to Vascular Disorders
16.7 Impairment of the Upper Extremities Due to Other Disorders
16.8 Strength Evaluation
16.9 Summary of Steps for Evaluating Impairments of the Upper Extremity
16.10 Clinical Examples
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairments due to anatomic impairments of the hand and the upper extremity. The methods discussed in this chapter for evaluation of upper extremity impairment due to amputation, sensory loss, and abnormal motion or ankylosis were based on A. B. Swanson’s work and adapted from the fourth edition and updated with input from many of the specialty societies listed in the preface.

The following revisions have been made for the fifth edition: (1) basic principles of assessment have been clarified, (2) updates of the latest scientific information in assessment of upper extremity impairments have been provided, (3) measurement of range of motion of the fingers has been clarified to also detect limited motion due to limited excursion of tendons,
(4) impairment determination for nerve entrapment syndromes has been clarified, (5) the criteria for diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome are discussed and consistent throughout the book,
(6) criteria for diagnosis and rating of carpal instability have been clarified, and (7) criteria for diagnosis and rating of weakness not due to other ratable conditions have been clarified.
--break--
16.1 Principles of Assessment
--break--
16.1 a Principles of Impairment Evaluation Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.
-- chars 3353 --

Methods for evaluating impairments of the upper extremities may be described as having anatomic, cosmetic, or functional bases. The physical evaluation determines the anatomic impairment and is based on the history and a detailed examination of the individual and the upper extremity(ies). The cosmetic evaluation concerns both the individual’s and society’s reaction to the individual’s condition. The functional evaluation measures the individual’s motor performance of activities of daily living or of a specific task within a set time frame. Functional studies are increasingly sophisticated and can complement the evaluation process. However, the necessary level of standardization in precision and reproducibility to assess function has not yet been developed to derive a numeric impairment rating.
Therefore, evaluation of anatomic impairment forms the basis for upper extremity assessment. The impairment ratings originally developed and retained in this chapter were developed to reflect the degree of impairment and its impact on the ability of the individual to perform activities of daily living.

The most practical and useful approach to evaluating impairment of a digit is to compare the current loss of function with the loss resulting from amputation. Total loss of motion and sensibility of a digit, or ankylosis with severe malposition that renders the digit essentially useless, is considered to be about the same as amputation of the part. Ankylosis of a digit or joint in the optimal functional position is given the least motion impairment of the part. Impairment due to total transverse sensory loss of a digit corresponds to 50% of the amputation impairment at the same length or level of involvement (Figures 16-6 and
--break--
16-7). Impairment values derived from amputation, loss of motion or ankylosis, and sensibility loss are combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

--break--
16.1 b Impairment Evaluation: Documentation and Recording
The medical evaluation is the basis for determination of permanent anatomic impairment of the upper extremities. It must be accurate, objective, and well documented. Evaluation of the upper extremities requires a sound knowledge of the normal functional anatomy and would be incomplete without assessment of the general condition of the whole person.
It must be thorough and should include several elements: status of activities of daily living; careful observations; both local and general physical examinations; appropriate imaging evaluation; laboratory tests; and, preferably, a photographic record.

The Upper Extremities
--break--
435

An impairment evaluation is based on the examiner’s actual findings. A prior injury or illness is considered during assessment of causation and apportionment, as discussed in Chapters 1 and 2. Impairment ratings in this chapter have not been adjusted for hand dominance, as is done in Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System. Hand dominance is difficult to objectively measure and is not accounted for in these impairment ratings. Hand dominance may be right or left and may be marked or slight, or the individual may be completely ambidextrous. Hand dominance should be considered in the determination of disability. If the examiner believes that hand dominance has a significant impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living, this can be discussed in the impairment evaluation report along with the resulting impairment rating. Hand dominance may, of course, be significant when assessing disability.
-- chars 3552 --

A complete and detailed examination of the upper extremities is necessary for accurate impairment evaluation. One method for recording results from a systematic examination is the use of the Upper Extremity Impairment Evaluation Record (Figures 16-1a and 16-1b). Part 1 of the evaluation record addresses the hand region and lists impairments due to abnormal motion or ankylosis, amputation, and sensory loss resulting from digital nerve lesions and to other disorders. Part 2 is designed to assist impairment evaluation of the wrist, elbow, and shoulder due to abnormal motion or ankylosis, amputation, and “other” disorders, as well as those related to the peripheral nerve system, peripheral vascular system, and other disorders not included in regional impairments (eg, grip strength). Table 16-1 gives conversions from digit to hand impairment, and Table 16-2 gives those from hand to upper extremity impairment. Regional impairments resulting from the hand, wrist, elbow, and shoulder regions are combined to provide the upper extremity impairment (see Section 1.4, Philosophy and Use of the Combined Values Chart, and the Combined Values Chart, p. 604). The upper extremity impairment is then converted to a whole person impairment by means of Table 16-3.
When to add as opposed to combine impairments is discussed in Sections 16.1c and 16.1d and noted in Figure 16-1.

The impairment evaluation record form is designed for use with unilateral upper extremity impairments. Cases of bilateral involvement require completion of a separate record form for each upper extremity. The whole person impairment values derived for each upper extremity are then combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to derive the total whole person impairment. If the total combined whole person impairment does not seem to adequately reflect the actual extent of alteration in the individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living, this should be noted.
• Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
†Use Table 16-2 (hand to upper extremity).
§Use Table 16-3. Courtesy of G. de Groot Swanson, MD, Grand Rapids, Michigan.
• Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
If both limbs are involved, calculate the whole person impairment for each on a separate chart and combine the percents (Combined Values Chart).

--break--
16.1c Combining Impairment Ratings The method for combining various impairments is based on the principle that a second and each succeeding impairment do not apply to the whole unit (eg, whole finger) but only to the part or value that remains (eg, proximal phalanx) after the preceding impairment (eg, amputation through the proximal interphalangeal joint) has been applied.

When a given unit has more than one type of impairment (eg, abnormal motion, sensory loss, and partial amputation of a finger), the various impairments are combined to determine the total
impairment of the unit (eg, finger) before conversion to the next larger unit (eg, hand). Similarly, multiple regional impairments, such as those of the hand, wrist, elbow, and shoulder, are first expressed individually as upper extremity impairments and then combined to determine the total upper extremity impairment. The latter is finally converted to whole person impairment (Table 16-3). The combined value determination is based on the following formula: A% + B% (100% – A%) = the combined value of A% and B%.
-- chars 3384 --

The Combined Values Chart (p. 604) is used to determine the combined value of two impairment percentages. All percentages being combined must be expressed on a common denominator or same unit relative value. If three or more values are to be combined, the two lowest values are first selected and their combined value is found. The combined value and the third value are then combined to give the total value. This procedure can be repeated indefinitely, with the value obtained in each case being a combination of all the previous values.

--break--
4. For each unit of motion, the motion impairment value is found by adding together the two impairment values contributed by its components, based on the formula A% = E% + F%. Similarly, for each joint, the total motion impairment rating is found by adding the impairment values contributed by each unit of motion. For example, the upper extremity impairment due to abnormal elbow motion is found by adding the impairments from the flexion + extension (IE% + IF%) unit to those from the pronation + supination (IP% + IS%) unit, or total motion impairment equals (IF% + IE%) + (IP% + IS%).
--break--
5. In Section 16.7, Impairment of the Upper Extremities Due to Other Disorders, the relative value of each joint has been assigned on a 100% digit unit scale: thumb CMC 60%, MP 15%, and IP 25%; and finger MP 50%, PIP 30%, and DIP 20% (Table 16-18). However, the relative value scale used in Table 16-18 is not the same as that assigned for amputations (Table 16-4) and range of motion. Therefore, if more than one joint of a specific digit is affected by other disorders, the impairments are added directly together only in the absence of amputation and presence of full motion of each joint involved. Otherwise, they are combined.

All other upper extremity impairment ratings are combined.

It should be noted that, in terms of upper extremity impairment, the functional unit values for the shoulder (60%), elbow (70%), wrist (60%), and digital joints differ from those assigned for amputation at similar levels (Tables 16-4 and 16-18 and Section 16.4).

--break--
16.2 b Amputation Impairment: Levels Proximal to Digits
The amputation impairment ratings increase with progressively shorter stumps and reach 70% of the whole person for a scapulothoracic (forequarter) amputation, as illustrated in Figure 16-2 and noted in Table 16-4. Amputations through the humerus at or proximal to the deltoid tubercle level (approximately the axillary fold) correspond to 100% loss of the limb, or 60% impairment of the whole person.
Amputations occurring between a level just distal to the deltoid tubercle and the bicipital tuberosity

--break--
16.2  Amputations
--break--
16.2 a General Principles
Important factors to consider in evaluating amputations include not only the level of occurrence but also the presence of associated problems relating to the condition of the residual stump (Section 16.2d), to regional or central pain syndromes, and to restriction or loss of motion of existing proximal joints (Section 16.4).
-- chars 3070 --

The upper limb is considered as a unit of the whole person and is divided into shoulder, elbow, wrist, and hand regions. The hand is further separated into digits and their parts. From distally to proximally, each anatomic unit is given a relative value to the next larger unit and, eventually, the whole person. By multiplying the appropriate percent, impairment of each unit can be converted sequentially to hand, upper extremity, and whole person impairment as indicated in Tables 16-1, 16-2, 16-3, and 16-4 and
Figures 16-2 and 16-3.

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.

Transmetacarpophalangeal amputation of all digits represents 100% hand impairment

MP = metacarpophalangeal PIP = proximal interphalangeal DIP = distal interphalangeal

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.

(insertion of the biceps brachii on the radius) constitute a 95% impairment of the upper extremity, or 57% impairment of the whole person. Amputations occurring between a level just distal to the bicipital tuberosity and the metacarpophalangeal joints of all digits are estimated to represent 94% to 90% impairment of the upper extremity (56% to 54% of the whole person) according to the functional possibilities afforded by either prosthetic or surgical options (eg, Krukenberg procedure), or simply by the actual length of the residual stump. The evaluator must use clinical judgment to select the appropriate values.

--break--
16.2 c Amputation Impairment: Digital Levels
Principles
Amputation of all digits (fingers and thumb) through the metacarpophalangeal joints removes the most essential parts of the hand and is considered 100% impairment of the hand, or 90% impairment of the

upper extremity. Since loss of the entire upper extremity represents 60% impairment of the whole person, this corresponds to 90% ? 60%, or 54% impairment of the whole person (Figures 16-2 and 16-3 and Tables 16-1 through 16-4).

Amputation through each joint level of a digit is given a relative value of loss to the entire digit as follows: digit metacarpophalangeal (MP) joint, 100%; thumb interphalangeal (IP) joint, 50%; finger proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint, 80%; and finger distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint, 45% (Figures 16-3, 16-4, and 16-5; Table 16-4). Digit impairment values for amputation at various levels are shown in Figures 16-4 (thumb) and 16-5 (fingers). Joints should be named rather than numbered.

Amputations of the thumb at levels proximal to the metacarpophalangeal joint are considered to provide a greater severity of impairment than amputation at the MP joint level. Amputation through the thumb MP joint represents a 36% impairment of the upper extremity. Amputation through the distal third of the first metacarpal receives 37% impairment of the upper extremity, and amputation at or near the first carpometacarpal joint is given 38% impairment of the upper extremity (Table 16-4).
-- chars 3075 --

The digits represent five coordinated units into which hand function is unequally divided. Each digit is given a relative value to the entire hand as follows: thumb, 40%; index and middle fingers, 20% each; and ring and little fingers, 10% each (Figure 16-3;
Tables 16-1 and 16-4). To avoid confusion, digits are named rather than numbered.

By multiplying the appropriate percentages, the impairment rating for each digit, or portion thereof, is converted to an impairment rating of the larger units, the hand, the upper extremity, and, finally, the whole person (Tables 16-1 through 16-4).
MP

Thumb amputation levels

PIP

Finger amputation levels
--break--
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 %

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the
MP
hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.

a Clinical Evaluation
Evaluation of sensory function in the hand considers all modalities of sensibility, including perception of pain, warmth, cold, and touch-pressure, as well as vibration.

The grading system introduced by the Nerve Injuries Committee of the British Medical Research Council in 1954 describes six levels of sensory recovery after nerve injury. These levels are still used today to describe sensory changes:

S0
Absent sensibility
S1
Recovery of deep cutaneous pain and pressure sensibility (protective sensibility absent)
S2
Return of some degree of superficial cutaneous pain and tactile sensibility, and temperature appreciation (protective sensibility decreased)
S3
Return of superficial cutaneous pain and tactile sensibility (light touch diminished)
S3+ Some recovery of two-point discrimination S4
Complete sensory recovery

Generally, if an individual has some light touch recognition, the sensory submodalities are assumed to be present.

All clinical tests used to examine the degree of functional loss of sensibility are related to cutaneous touch-pressure sensation. At present, the two-point test for fine discrimination sensibility is most widely used, followed by the monofilament touch-pressure threshold test. The pinprick test can be useful to determine whether pain protective sensation is intact and to identify discrepancies between dermatomal findings and reported symptoms. More accurate assessment is obtained by using the sharp and dull sides of the pin at random. Vibration testing has yet to be associated with functional levels of sensibility.

The Ninhydrin sweat test and wrinkle test may be useful in documenting interruption of digital nerves, especially where questions exist concerning consistency between reported symptoms and neurologic findings. However, these tests have limitations in evaluating a recovering or compressed nerve, because they do not correlate with the presence or absence of sensibility in a regenerating nerve. The Semmes-Weinstein monofilament pressure aesthesiometer measures light-touch and deep-pressure thresholds with sufficient accuracy to quantify returning sensibility levels long before two-point discrimination is measurable. The moving two-point discrimination test may be useful in evaluating recovering nerve function because response to this stimulus returns before response to a static two-point stimulus. Functional isolation of the finger, as noted in the blindfolded picking-up test, can help determine the presence or absence of any useful sensibility in the digit.
-- chars 3521 --

The patterns of nerve loss and recovery seen in neuropathy or neuritis from disease or nerve compression are different from those following nerve lacerations. Within the limits of current instruments, two-point discrimination tests have been normal, whereas both the Semmes-Weinstein pressure aesthesiometer and nerve conduction studies have been abnormal in both clinical and induced neuropathies. Two-point discrimination has its widest application for individuals who have sustained nerve lacerations, in whom presence of two-point discrimination usually indicates significant return of function.

The classic Weber static two-point discrimination test is most valuable. Moberg originally described the use of a paper clip opened and bent into a caliper. The Disk-Criminator, DeMayo 2-Point Discrimination Device, and Boley Gauge are some of the currently available testing instruments. Testing is started distally and proceeds proximally. The distance between the tips of the instrument is set first at 5 mm. As the individual being tested closes his or her eyes, the tips of the testing device are applied lightly to the sides of the pulp of the distal segment of the digit in a random sequence, in a longitudinal orientation. Because it is light-touch discrimination that is being tested, the pressure applied should be very light and must not produce a point of blanching or skin indentation. The interval between applications should be no less than 3 to 5 seconds. A series of touches with one or two

points is made, and the individual immediately indicates whether one or two points are felt. Two out of three responses must be accurate for scoring. The distance between the ends is progressively increased until the required accurate responses are elicited, at which time the distance is recorded.

Sensibility assessment is one of the most challenging tasks in impairment evaluation. The subjective nature of sensibility testing can relate to a number of variables involving the testing environment, the individual being tested, the test instruments and methods of administration, and the examiner. Tests should be administered in a quiet environment void of extraneous noises that distract the individual and the tester. Examinee-related variables can include attitude, concentration, anxiety, and the like. Abnormal skin texture, such as calluses, also influences the test results. Instrument-related variables include manufacturing quality control, readjustment of calibration as needed over time, and the weight of various instruments.
Important method-related variables include rate and duration of stimulus application, the amount of pressure exerted on the skin, and whether the stimulus is moving or constant. Instruments designed to control the force and velocity of two-point or monofilament application and of other stimuli are not yet available. The examiner’s experience, attention to detail, and adherence to methods of administration can minimize the effects of the above variables.
-- chars 3011 --

--break--
16.3 b Digital Nerve Sensory Impairment Evaluation: Principles
Only unequivocal and permanent sensory deficits are given permanent impairment ratings. Sensory impairment is rated according to the sensory quality and the distribution of the sensory loss.

The sensory quality is based on the results of the
two-point discrimination test carried out over the distal palmar area of the digit, or on the most distal part of the stump in the presence of a partial amputation. Sensibility defects on the dorsal surfaces of the digits are not considered impairing. The sensory quality impairment is classified according to Table 16-5.
In total sensory losses (>15 mm), the response to touch, pinprick, pressure, and vibratory stimuli is absent. In partial sensory losses (7-15 mm), there is poor localization and abnormal response to the sensory stimuli.

Total transverse sensory loss impairments correspond to 50% of amputation values.

The sensory quality impairment ratings derived from Table 16-5 are to be used only for impairment due to lesions of digital nerves. They cannot be used in Table 16-10 as a substitute for selecting the grade of severity of sensory deficits or pain resulting from peripheral nerve disorders. Values from Table 16-5 are not to be used as severity index multipliers in
MP

Digit impairment %
Amputation
--break--
0  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

--break--
0  5  10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Total transverse sensory loss

conjunction with assessment of individual spinal

nerves (Table 16-13), brachial plexus (Table 16-14), or major peripheral nerves (Table 16-15).

The distribution, or area, of sensory loss is determined by the level of involvement (percentage of digit length affected) of either both digital nerves (transverse sensory loss) or one digital nerve on either the radial or ulnar side of the digit (longitudinal sensory loss). The percentage of digit length involved is derived from the top scale of Figure 16-6 for the thumb and of Figure 16-7 for the fingers.
Total transverse sensory loss represents 100% sensory loss (> 15 mm) involving both digital nerves and

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.

Total transverse sensory loss impairments correspond to 50% of amputation values.

Digit impairment %
Amputation

receives 50% of the digit amputation impairment value for the corresponding level (Figures 16-6 and 16-7, bottom scale, and Tables 16-6 and 16-7).

Partial transverse sensory loss represents 50% sensory loss (7-15 mm) involving both digital nerves and receives 25% of the digit amputation impairment value for the corresponding digit length percentage (Tables 16-6 and 16-7).

MP

--break--
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

--break--
0  5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Total transverse sensory loss

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.

From Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G, Hagert CG. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Mackin EJ, Callahan AD, eds. Rehabilitation of the Hand: Surgery and Therapy. Fourth ed. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby; 1995:1858.
-- chars 3223 --

From Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G, Hagert CG. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Mackin EJ, Callahan AD, eds. Rehabilitation of the Hand: Surgery and Therapy. Fourth ed. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby; 1995:1858.

--break--
16.3 c Rating Impairment Due to Digital Neuromas
The grade of severity of pain and decreased function associated with neuromas of the digital nerves is rated according to Table 16-10a. The severity grade percentage is multiplied by the maximum impairment value of the digital nerve involved (see Table 16-10b, Procedure). The maximum digit impairment values for each digital nerve are found in Table 16-6 for the thumb and little finger and Table 16-7 for the index, middle, and ring fingers under the columns headed Longitudinal Loss, Total (Ulnar or Radial),
--break--
16.3
d Digital Nerve Sensory Impairment Determination Method
--break--
1. Use the two-point discrimination test to identify the sensory quality, or type of sensory loss, as total (> 15 mm) or partial (7 through 15 mm) (Table 16-5).
--break--
2. Determine the distribution of sensory loss involvement or whether one (longitudinal sensory loss) or both (transverse sensory loss) digital nerves are involved.
--break--
3. Identify the level of involvement, or percentage of digit length involved, using the top scale of Figure 16-6 for the thumb and of Figure 16-7 for the fingers.
--break--
4. Consult Table 16-6 for the thumb and little finger and Table 16-7 for the index, middle, and ring fingers to determine the digit impairment for either total or partial, transverse or longitudinal (ulnar or radial) sensory loss according to the percentage of digit length involved.
--break--
5. If both digital nerves are involved in the same digit, the sensory impairments relating to the ulnar or radial palmar nerves are added.
--break--
6. Convert the digit impairment to hand, upper extremity, and whole person impairment by using Tables 16-1, 16-2, and 16-3. When a digit has more than one impairment, obtain the total digit impairment value by combining its various impairments before converting the digit values to a hand value.
Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.

In assessing motion, the examiner should first observe what an individual can and cannot do by asking him or her to move each joint of the extremity, from the shoulder down, through its full range of motion. Both extremities should be compared. Individual joints are then evaluated separately. Similarly, movements of the digits are first evaluated as a unit by having the individual make a complete fist and then extend the digits fully over several repetitions. In determining the range of motion of individual joints, the examiner must evaluate both the active and the passive motion. Active or voluntary motion is that performed by the active con-
traction of the governing muscles and is evaluated first. When a person has full active joint excursion, passive motion values need not to be taken because a joint that has full active excursion will have a full passive range as well. However, if the active arc of motion is incomplete, assisted active and/or passive motion measurements are necessary to evaluate the joint motion.
-- chars 3304 --
Passive motion is that produced by an external force to determine the freedom and range of motion existing at a joint when all muscles are relaxed. An example,
is Bunnell’s test for intrinsic tightness in the hand. Assisted active motion is the result of active muscle contraction and an external force applied to the joint; it allows for stabilization of a segment to improve the mechanical advantage of the muscles that move the joint being measured. In both cases, approximately 0.5 kg of force is applied while a segment of the joint is stabilized. Measurements of active motion take precedence in the Guides. The actual measured goniometer readings or linear measurements are recorded.

Many different factors can limit the normal range of motion of the joints of the upper extremities.
Limitation of active motion can be due to failure of the nerve, muscle, or tendon to execute the motion. Limitation of passive motion can be from involvement of the joint itself, a fixed contracture, or the antagonistic muscle or tendon that holds back the motion because it is adherent or too short. Sound clinical knowledge and measurement techniques are necessary for appropriate impairment evaluation and rating.

Digital joints are measured with the wrist held in neutral position and the forearm pronated. To measure the ROM of individual joints, the proximal joint(s) are stabilized in extension, and only the joint being measured is flexed. Note that if all three joints are flexed simultaneously, as in making a fist, active flexion of the metacarpophalangeal joint will be decreased. In some cases of decreased finger motion due to limited excursion of the activating musculotendinous unit or blockage of motion by the antagonistic musculotendinous unit, the measurement of individual joints, as described earlier, can be normal or near normal. In these situations, the total active range of motion (TAM) of the digit is measured.
Flexion of each joint is measured while all three joints are held in a position of maximum active flexion, or the finger is flexed as a whole unit; similarly, extension of each joint is measured while all three joints are held in maximum extension. The methods used to derive motion impairment of a digit using individual joint measurements and the total active range of motion of a digit are different, as explained on p. 465, Combining Abnormal Motion at More Than One Finger Joint. The joint measurement technique that best reflects the existing impairment is selected.

--break--
16.4 b Principle for Motion Impairment Calculation: A = E + F
The arc of motion is the total number of degrees of excursion measured between the two extreme angles of a plane of motion of a joint, for example, from maximum extension to maximum flexion. When there is complete loss of joint motion, or ankylosis, the total number of degrees of lost motion (A) equals the sum of lost extension degrees (E) and lost flexion degrees (F), or A = E + F. A always equals the total number of degrees of the normal arc of motion.
-- chars 3038 --

The symbol V represents the measured angle. The measured angle of extension is represented by Vext, and the measured angle of flexion is represented by Vflex. Assuming that a joint, which normally has a range of motion of 0° extension to 90° flexion, has a measured Vext at 0° and Vflex at 90°, then there is no loss of motion.

When the joint flexion is decreased, F (lost flexion degrees) equals the theoretically largest Vflex minus the measured Vflex. For example, if a joint that would normally flex to 90° has a measured Vflex at 60°:
F = 90° – 60° = 30° flexion loss.

When joint extension is decreased, E (lost extension degrees) equals the measured Vext minus the theoretically smallest Vext. For example, if a joint that would normally extend to 0° has an extension lag measured at Vext 20°: E = 20° – 0° = 20° extension loss.

With decreasing flexion, Vflex decreases, and with increasing extension loss, Vext increases; as motion is lost, these values will finally meet at the same point on the arc of motion, or Vflex will equal Vext. When this occurs, there is ankylosis, or total loss of the potential arc of motion degrees (A). For example,
if a joint that would normally extend to 0° and flex to 90° is ankylosed at 40°: Vext = Vflex = 40°; E = 40° – 0° = 40°; F = 90° – 40° = 50°;
A = 40° (E) + 50° (F), or 90°; and there is total loss of the potential full arc of motion.

Impairment of finger motion may be due to loss of extension (E) with or without loss of flexion (F) or to ankylosis (A). The restricted motion impairment percents are called IE%, IF%, and IA%, respectively, and are functions of the angle (V) measured at examination.

IE% = 0% when Vext reaches its smallest theoretical value.
IF% = 0% when Vflex reaches its largest theoretical value.
IA% = IE% + IF% when Vext= Vflex.

The formula A% = E% + F% can also be written
E% = A% – F%; therefore, impairment values for lack of extension (IE%) can be derived for any measured extension angle on the basis that IE% = IA% – IF%.
The derivation of both IE% and IF% allows estimation of impairment percentages relating not only to the number of degrees of lost motion but, most important, to the location of the loss on the arc of motion.

Motion impairment curves based on the formula A% = E% + F% were derived on a 100% scale for each motion unit of each upper extremity joint, tak-
ing into consideration the functional position of each joint as recommended in the literature for fusion (eg, Figure 16-11). The value of A% reaches its maximum, or 100%, at the two extreme positions of the arc of motion and drops to its lowest percent when the angle of ankylosis corresponds to the position of function of the joint. The motion impairment curves plotted on a 100% motion unit scale were converted to pie charts of regional motion impairment (thumb, finger, upper extremity) by applying the relative regional value of each respective motion unit as a conversion factor (eg, Figure 16-12).

For example, wrist functional unit = 60% of upper extremity function. Flexion/extension unit = 70% of wrist function unit, or 70% ? 60% = 42% of upper extremity function. Radial/ulnar deviation unit = 30% of wrist functional unit, or 30% ? 60% = 18% of upper extremity function. The flexion/extension motion unit impairment curve (Figure 16-27) was multiplied by 42% to derive the pie chart of upper extremity impairment (Figure 16-28) resulting from restricted wrist flexion/extension. The radial/ulnar deviation motion unit impairment curve (Figure
-- chars 3525 --
--break--
16-30) was multiplied by 18% to obtain the pie chart of upper extremity impairment (Figure 16-31) resulting from restricted wrist lateral deviation.

--break--
16.4 c Method for Motion Impairment Calculation
The motion impairment pie charts are used for motion impairment calculation of a specific joint. Because the same relative value scale is applied to each motion unit and to its components, the impairment values derived for each are added directly together to obtain the total motion impairment of a specific joint. The total impairment value of a motion unit is obtained by adding the impairment values contributed by its two component movements (eg, impairment of flexion/extension motion unit = IF% + IE%). Similarly, when a joint has more than one unit of motion (eg, elbow flexion/extension and pronation/supination), its total motion impairment is obtained by adding the impairment values contributed by each unit of motion. When a joint that has a single unit of motion (eg, MP joint) is ankylosed, IA% represents its motion impairment. When a joint that has more than one unit of motion (eg, the elbow) is ankylosed, the ankylosis impairments (IA%) derived for each motion unit are added to obtain its total motion impairment.

--break--
1. Measure the maximum active flexion and extension and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-10).

Ankylosis in functional position (20° flexion) receives lowest IA% value (50%).
Hyperextension

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

--break--
2. Using Figure 16-12, match the measured angles of flexion and extension (row headed V) to their corresponding impairments of flexion (row headed IF%) and of extension (row headed IE%). Impairment percents for positions of hyperextension are read above the 0° neutral position. Impairment values for measured angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-12 may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.
--break--
3. Add IF% and IE% values to obtain thumb impairment for decreased motion of the IP joint.
--break--
4. If the IP joint is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to its corresponding ankylosis impairment under the row headed IA% (Figure 16-12). Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles. Ankylosis in the functional position (20° flexion) is given the lowest ankylosis impairment value (7%).
IE% IA%

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis
IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
V  = Measured angles of motion
= Position of function

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

Thumb MP Joint: Flexion and Extension The thumb MP joint motion ranges from + 40° hyperextension to 60° flexion. The functional position is 20° flexion. The relative value of the functional unit is 10% of the thumb ray.
-- chars 3189 --

--break--
1. Measure the maximum active flexion and extension and record the goniometer readings (Figure 16-13).
--break--
2. Using Figure 16-15, match the measured angles of flexion and extension (row headed V) to their corresponding impairments of flexion (row headed IF%) and of extension (row headed IE%). Impairment percents for positions of hyperextension are read above the 0° neutral position. Impairment values for measured angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-15 may be adjusted or interpolated to be proportionally in the corresponding interval.
--break--
3.
Add the values for IF% and IE% to obtain thumb impairment for decreased motion of the MP joint.
--break--
4. If the MP joint is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to its corresponding ankylosis impairment under the row headed IA% (Figure 16-15). Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles. Ankylosis in the functional position (20° flexion) is given the lowest IA%, or 5%.

Ankylosis in functional position (20° flexion) receives the lowest IA% value (50%).
--break--
10

IF% IE%

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

--break--
10

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis

IA%

IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
V  = Measured angles of motion
= Position of function

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

Relative value of functional unit is 10% of the thumb ray motion. Motion ranges from 15° of radial adduction to 50° of radial abduction.

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.
--break--
7
Thumb-lack of adduction

--break--
8 cm

Redrawn from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

--break--
1. Measure and record the actual smallest active adduction distance in centimeters.
--break--
2. Consult Table 16-8b to determine the percentage of thumb impairment contributed by adduction lack or ankylosis. Impairment values for measured distances falling between those shown in Table 16-8b may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.

Relative value of functional unit is 20% of the thumb ray motion. Motion ranges from 8 to 0 cm of adduction.

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.
-- chars 3072 --

Adding Two or More Abnormal Thumb Motions
--break--
1. Measure and record the thumb impairments of flexion and extension at the IP and MP joints (Figures 16-12 and 16-15), radial abduction and adduction (Table 16-8a), adduction (Table 16-8b), and opposition (Table 16-9) as described above.
--break--
2. Add the impairment values contributed by each motion unit to determine the total thumb impairment due to abnormal motion.

Because the relative value of each unit of motion to the entire thumb ray was taken into consideration in the thumb impairment charts and tables, the thumb impairments resulting from abnormal motion are added directly together. If each thumb unit of motion were impaired to its maximum value, the total thumb motion impairment would add to 100%. Note that when more than one finger joint is involved, the impairment values are combined because the relative value of each finger joint (DIP, PIP, MP) was not assigned on a 100% finger unit scale.
--break--
16.4e Finger Motion Impairment
The fingers have three functional units of motion, each having the same relative functional value as that found in amputation impairment: DIP, 45%; PIP, 80%; and MP, 100% (Table 16-4).

For each joint, unit-of-motion impairment curves were derived according to the basic formula, A = E + F, and converted to pie charts of finger impairment values by applying the relative value of each functional unit as a conversion factor (Figures 16-21,
--break--
16-23, and 16-25).

In the normal hand, the MP joint can hyperextend usefully to 20°; a small percentage of extension impairment has been assigned to loss of hyperextension, or IE% = 5% at 0° extension (Figure 16-25). The PIP and DIP joints normally extend to 0°, and IE% equals 0% at this angle; between the angles of 0° extension and
+30° hyperextension, impairment values are given for lack of flexion and not for hyperextension.
Consideration for positions of hyperextension allows one to rate impairment of flexion or ankylosis for angles above the 0° neutral position. For example, ankylosis of the PIP joint in 30° hyperextension equals 80% finger impairment (Figure 16-23). Note that, for each joint, the ankylosis impairment value is at its lowest for the angle of functional position.

%
--break--
42

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis
IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
V  = Measured angles of motion
= Position of function

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

The actual range-of-motion measurements are recorded and applied to the various impairment pie charts. Impairment values for motion measurements falling between those shown in a pie chart may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.

The techniques for clinical measurement of motion of the digital joints are described in Section 16.4a. Two methods are presented: (1) measurement of individual joints with the proximal joints stabilized in extension and (2) measurement of the total active range of motion of the digit while all three joints are flexed simultaneously. The joint measurement technique that best reflects the existing impairment is selected.
-- chars 3361 --

DIP Joint: Flexion and Extension
The DIP joint has a normal motion of 0° extension to 70° flexion. The functional position is 20° flexion.
The relative value of this motion unit is 45% of the finger.

--break--
1. Measure the maximum flexion and extension,
and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-20).
--break--
2. Using Figure 16-21, match the measured angles (row headed V) of flexion and extension to their corresponding impairments of flexion (row headed IF%) and extension (row headed IE%). Impairment percents for positions of hyperextension are read above the 0° neutral position. Impairment values for measured angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-21 may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.
--break--
3. Add IF% and IE% to obtain the finger impairment due to decreased motion of the DIP joint.
--break--
4. If the DIP joint is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to the corresponding ankylosis impairment under the row headed IA% in Figure 16-21. Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles. Ankylosis in the functional position (20° flexion) is given the lowest ankylosis impairment value (30%).
--break--
100? V

--break--
3. Add I % and I % to obtain the finger impairment
IE%

resulting from decreased motion of the PIP joint.
--break--
4. If the PIP joint is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to the corresponding ankylosis impairment (row headed IA%) in Figure 16-23. Interpolate impairment value for intervening angles. Ankylosis in the functional position (40° flexion) is given the lowest ankylosis impairment percent (50%).

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis
IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion

IF% IE% IA%

The finger MP joint motion ranges from +20° hyperextension to 90° flexion. The functional position is 30° flexion. The relative value of this motion unit is 100% of the finger.

--break--
1. Measure the maximum active flexion and extension, and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-24).
--break--
2. Using Figure 16-25, match the measured angles (row headed V) of flexion and extension to their corresponding impairments of flexion (row headed IF%) and extension (row headed IE %). Impairment values for positions of hyperextension are read above the 0° neutral position. Impairment values for measured angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-25 may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.
--break--
3. Add IF% and IE% to obtain finger impairment resulting from decreased motion of the MP joint.
--break--
4. If the MP joint is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to the corresponding ankylosis impairment (row headed IA%) in Figure 16-
--break--
25. Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles. Ankylosis in the functional position (30° flexion) is given the lowest IA% value (45%).

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis
IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
-- chars 3018 --
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
V  = Measured angles of motion
= Position of function

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

For each wrist functional unit of motion, impairment curves were derived according to the basic formula, A = E + F and expressed on a 100% motion unit scale (Figures 16-27 and 16-30). These impairment curves were converted to pie charts of upper extremity impairment by applying their relative upper extremity functional value as a conversion factor (Figures 16-28 and 16-31).

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

The upper extremity impairment due to abnormal wrist motion is calculated from the pie charts by adding directly together the upper extremity impairment contributed by each motion unit.

The actual range-of-motion measurements are recorded and applied to the various impairment pie charts. Impairment values for motion measurements falling between those shown in the pie chart may
be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.

Ankyloses in functional positions (10° extension to 10° flexion) are given the lowest IA% value (50%).

Relative value of this functional unit to upper extremity impairment

Extension
Flexion

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation
--break--
30

of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds.
Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.
--break--
42  IE%

Flexion and Extension
The normal range of wrist motion is from 60° exten-

--break--
42

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis

IA%

sion to 60° flexion. The position of function is from 10° extension to 10° flexion. The relative value of this motion unit is 42% of the upper extremity function.

--break--
1. Measure maximum active wrist flexion and extension, and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-26).
--break--
2. In Figure 16-28, match the measured flexion and extension angles (row headed V) to their corresponding impairments of flexion (row headed IF%) and extension (row headed IE%). Impairment values for angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-28 may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.
--break--
3. Add IF% and IE% to obtain the percent of upper extremity impairment contributed by decreased wrist flexion and extension.
--break--
4. If the wrist is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to its corresponding ankylosis impairment (row headed IA%) in Figure 16-28. Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles.

IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
-- chars 3036 --
V  = Measured angles of motion
= Positions of function

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

Ankyloses in functional positions (10° extension to 10° flexion) are given the lowest IA%, or 50% of this motion unit value (Figure 16-27). This corresponds to 21% impairment of the upper extremity (Figure 16-28). Wrist ankylosis in 60° flexion or 60° extension represents 100% loss of wrist extension and flexion function (Figure 16-27). This is equivalent to 70% impairment of wrist function, or 42% impairment (70% ? 60%) of the upper extremity resulting from loss of this wrist motion unit (Figure 16-28).

Ankyloses in functional positions (0° to 10° ulnar deviation) are given the lowest ankylosis impairment (50%).

Relative value of this functional unit to upper extremity impairment
--break--
0?*  5?* 10?*
--break--
18
IRD%

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.
IRD% = Impairment due to loss of radial deviation
IUD% = Impairment due to loss of ulnar deviation
V
= Measured angles of motion
= Positions of function

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

Flexion and Extension
The normal range of motion is considered to be from 140° flexion to 0° extension. The position of function is 80° flexion. The relative value of this motion unit is 42% of the upper extremity function.

--break--
1. Measure the maximum active elbow flexion and extension, and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-32).
--break--
2. In Figure 16-34, match the measured flexion and extension angles (row headed V) to their corresponding impairments of flexion (row headed IF%) and extension (row headed IE%). Impairment values for angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-34 may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.
--break--
3. Add IF% and IE% to obtain the upper extremity impairment percent contributed by decreased elbow flexion and extension.
--break--
4. If the elbow is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to its corresponding ankylosis impairment (row headed IA%) in Figure 16-34. Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles.

Ankylosis in the functional position (80° flexion) is given the lowest IA%, or 50% of this motion unit value (Figure 16-33). This corresponds to 21% impairment of the upper extremity (Figure 16-34). Ankylosis in either 0° extension or 140° flexion represents a 100% loss of elbow flexion and extension function (Figure 16-33). This is equivalent to 60% impairment of elbow function and 42% impairment (60% ? 70%) of the upper extremity due to loss of this elbow motion unit (Figure 16-34).
-- chars 3183 --

Ankylosis in functional position (80° flexion) is given the lowest IA% value (50%).

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

Relative value of this functional unit to upper extremity impairment is 42%.
Elbow

Extension

Impairments of pronation and supination are ascribed to the elbow because the major muscles for this function are inserted about the elbow. This applies even if the loss of forearm rotation results primarily from wrist involvement in the presence of an intact elbow.

--break--
1. Measure the maximum active elbow pronation
--break--
10  0?  V

and supination, and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-35).
--break--
2. In Figure 16-37, match the measured supination and pronation angles (row headed V) to their
IF% IE% IA%

corresponding impairments of pronation (row headed IP%) and supination (row headed IS%). Impairment values for angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-37 may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis
IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
V  = Measured angles of motion
= Position of function

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.
--break--
20?*
--break--
40?
--break--
60?
--break--
80?
Supination
Pronation

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.
Extension: 10% of shoulder function.
Flexion and extension unit: 50% of shoulder function, or 50% ? 60% = 30% of upper extremity function.
--break--
2. Abduction: 20% of shoulder function.
Adduction: 10% of shoulder function.
Abduction and adduction unit: 30% of shoulder function, or 30% ? 60% = 18% of upper extremity function.
--break--
3. Internal rotation: 10% of shoulder function.
Pronation

External rotation: 10% of shoulder function.
Internal and external rotation unit: 20% of shoulder function, or 20% ? 60% = 12% of upper extremity function.

For each shoulder functional unit of motion, impairment curves were derived according to the basic formula, A = E + F, and expressed on a 100% motion unit scale (Figures 16-39, 16-42, and 16-45). These impairment curves were converted to pie charts of
upper extremity impairments by applying the upper extremity functional value of each motion unit as a conversion factor (Figures 16-40, 16-43, and 16-46).

The upper extremity impairment resulting from

IP% = Impairment due to loss of pronation
IS% = Impairment due to loss of supination
-- chars 3008 --
V  = Measured angles of motion
= Position of function

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

--break--
4. If the shoulder is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to its corresponding ankylosis impairment (row headed IA%) in Figure 16-40. Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles.

Ankyloses in functional positions (40° flexion to 20° flexion) are given the lowest IA%, or 50% of this motion unit value (Figure 16-39). This corresponds to 15% impairment of the upper extremity (Figure 16-40). Ankylosis in 50° extension or 180° flexion represents 100% loss of this shoulder motion unit (Figure 16-39). This is equivalent to 50% impairment of shoulder function, or 30% impairment
(50% ? 60%) of the upper extremity resulting from loss of this shoulder unit of motion (Figure 16-40).
Ankyloses in functional positions (40° to 20° flexion) are given the lowest IA% value (50%).
--break--
0%
--break--
50?40?  20?  0?  20?*30?*40?* 60?  80? 100? 120? 140? 160? 180?
Extension
Flexion

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

Relative value of this functional unit to upper extremity impairment is 30%.

Abduction and Adduction
The normal range of motion is considered to be from 180° abduction to 50° adduction. The positions of

function range from 50° abduction to 20° abduction. The relative value of this motion unit is 18% of the upper extremity function.

Flexion
--break--
1. Measure the maximum active shoulder abduction and adduction, and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-41).
--break--
2. In Figure 16-43, match the measured abduction
V
and adduction angles (row headed V) to their cor-
responding impairments of abduction (row headed
--break--
1
--break--
29
--break--
27

falling between those listed in Figure 16-43 may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.
--break--
3. Add IABD% + IADD% to obtain the upper extremity

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis
IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
V  = Measured angles of motion
= Positions of function

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.
IABD% = Impairment due to loss of abduction
IADD% = Impairment due to loss of adduction
V
= Measured angles of motion
= Positions of function

Ankyloses in functional positions (50° to 20° abduction) are given the lowest IA% (50%).
--break--
0%
--break--
180?  160?  140?  120? 100?  80?  60?50?*40?*30?*20?*  0?
-- chars 3027 --
--break--
20?  40? 50?
Abduction
Adduction

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.
--break--
30
--break--
0%
--break--
90? 80? 70? 60? 50?* 40?*30?* 20? 10? 0? 10? 20? 30? 40? 50? 60? 70? 80? 90?
Internal Rotation
External Rotation

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

Relative value of this functional unit to upper extremity impairment is 12%.

Determining Impairment Due to Abnormal Shoulder Motion
--break--
1. Using Figures 16-40, 16-43, and 16-46, determine the impairment of the upper extremity contributed by each shoulder unit of motion (flexion and extension, abduction and adduction, internal and external rotation) by adding I % + I %, I
--break--
12

IA% IER%
I %

IADD% and IIR% + IER%, as described in preceding sections.
--break--
2. Because the relative upper extremity value of each
--break--
60

shoulder functional unit has been taken into consideration in the impairment pie charts, the impairment values contributed by each unit of
--break--
20

External rotation

motion are added to determine the impairment of
the upper extremity due to abnormal shoulder

--break--
2
--break--
10
motion, or it equals (IF% + IE%) + (IABD% +

IADD%) + (IIR% + IER%).
--break--
3. If the shoulder is ankylosed, add the ankylosis impairments contributed by each unit of motion to determine the upper extremity impairment resulting from loss of shoulder motion.
--break--
4.
Use Table 16-3 to relate the impairment of the upper extremity to impairment of the whole
--break--
16.5a Impairment Evaluation Principles The evaluation of permanent impairment resulting from peripheral nerve disorders is based on the anatomic distribution and severity of loss of function resulting from (1) sensory deficits or pain and
(2) motor deficits and loss of power. Characteristic deformities and manifestations resulting from peripheral nerve lesions, such as restricted motion, atrophy, and vasomotor, trophic, and reflex changes, have been taken into consideration in the estimated impairment values shown in this section. Therefore, when an impairment results strictly from a peripheral nerve lesion, in the absence of CRPS, the motion impairment values derived from Section 16.4 are not applied to this section to avoid duplication or unwarranted increase in the impairment estimation. For example, the claw hand deformity of MP joint hyperextension and IP joint flexion of the ring and little fingers is a classic manifestation of an ulnar nerve lesion; in absence of CRPS II/causalgia, the impairment value for motor deficit of the ulnar nerve is derived according to this section and applied without assigning additional impairment for loss of motion. However, if restricted motion cannot be attributed strictly to a peripheral nerve lesion, such as would be the case in CRPS I/RSD, the motion impairment values are evaluated separately according to Section
-- chars 3257 --
--break--
16.4 and then combined (Combined Values Chart,
p. 604) with the peripheral nerve system impairment value derived from this section.

--break--
16.5b Impairment Evaluation Methods The upper extremity impairment is calculated by multiplying the grade of severity of the sensory deficit (Table 16-10a) and/or of the motor deficit (Table 16-11a) by the respective maximum upper extremity impairment value resulting from sensory and/or motor deficits of each nerve structure involved, as listed in Section 16.5c, Regional Impairment Determination: spinal nerves, Table 1613; brachial plexus, Table 16-14; and major peripheral nerves, Table 16-15. When both sensory and motor functions are involved, the impairment values derived for each are combined (Combined Values Chart, p. 604). The steps of the impairment determination method are detailed below.

The origins and functions of the peripheral nerves that serve the upper extremities are summarized in Table 16-12. The motor innervation of the upper extremity is shown in Figure 16-47. The cutaneous innervation and related nerves are shown in Figure 16-48, the dermatomes of the upper extremities in Figure 16-49, and a schematic diagram of the brachial plexus in Figure 16-50.

Impairment Determination Method
Use the following method to evaluate the impairment resulting from each peripheral nerve structure:

--break--
1. If sensory deficits or pain is present, localize the distribution and relate it to the nerve structure involved (Table 16-12 and Figures 16-48, 16-49,
and 16-50).
--break--
2. If motor deficits or loss of power is present, identify the key muscles involved and relate the motor deficit to the nerve structure(s) involved (Table 16-12 and Figures 16-47 and 16-50).
--break--
3. Grade the severity of sensory deficits or pain according to Table 16-10a and/or that of the motor deficits according to Table 16-11a.
--break--
4. Find the values for maximum impairment of the upper extremity due to sensory and/or motor deficits of the nerve structure involved: individual spinal nerve (Table 16-13), brachial plexus (Table 16-14), and major peripheral nerves (Table 16-15).
--break--
5. For each nerve structure involved, multiply the grade of severity of the sensory and/or motor deficits (see step 3 above) by the appropriate maximum upper extremity impairment value (see step 4 above) to determine the upper extremity impairment percent for each function.
--break--
6.
For a structure with mixed motor and sensory fibers, determine the upper extremity impairment for each function (steps 1 through 5), then combine the sensory and motor impairment percents (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to obtain the total upper extremity impairment value.
--break--
7. When more than one nerve structure is involved, combine their respective upper extremity impairment values (steps 1 through 5) to obtain the total upper extremity impairment resulting from peripheral nerve disorders (Combined Values Chart).
--break--
8. When multiple impairments of the extremity are present because of amputation, loss of motion that is not strictly attributed to a peripheral nerve lesion, or peripheral vascular disorders, combine the peripheral nerve upper extremity impairment value with the other upper extremity impairment values (Combined Values Chart) to obtain the total upper extremity impairment.
-- chars 3365 --
--break--
9. The total upper extremity impairment is converted to a whole person impairment by means of Table 16-3.
--break--
10. If there is bilateral upper extremity involvement, determine separately the impairment values for each side, and convert them to whole person impairment. Combine the whole person impairment values for each side (Combined Values Chart) to obtain the total whole person impairment. Consult page 435 for further comments on bilateral upper extremity involvement.

Grading Sensory Deficits or Pain
A wide range of abnormal sensations may be associated with peripheral nerve lesions, including diminished sensation (anesthesia or hypesthesia), abnormal sensation (dysesthesia or paresthesia), and increased sensation (hyperesthesia). Another possible manifestation is pain of various types, including pain resulting from nonnoxious stimulus (allodynia), overreactive pain (hyperpathia), a state of dysesthetic pain (deafferentation), and, most significantly, the sustained, burning pain present in CRPS I (RSD)
and CRPS II (causalgia). Cold intolerance may also be present.

Sensory deficits or pain associated with peripheral nerve disorders are evaluated according to the following criteria: (1) How does the sensory deficit or pain interfere with the individual’s performance of daily activities? (2) To what extent does the sensory deficit or pain follow the defined anatomic pathways of the spinal nerves, brachial plexus, or peripheral nerves? (3) To what extent is the description of the sensory deficit or pain consistent with characteristics of peripheral nerve disorders? (4) To what extent does the sensory deficit or pain correspond to other disturbances (motor, trophic, vasomotor, etc) of the involved nerve structure?

The methods for clinical assessment of sensibility are detailed in Section 16.3. In individuals with nerve lacerations, the presence of two-point discrimination usually indicates significant return of function. However, in conditions such as radiculitis, causalgia, and entrapment or compression neuropathy, normal two-point discrimination does not exclude the presence of abnormal light-touch/deeppressure thresholds and abnormal conduction studies. Conversely, the presence of a normal light-touch threshold does not necessarily indicate that two-point discrimination is normal in these cases. The use of the Semmes-Weinstein touch-pressure threshold monofilament test may be a helpful adjunct to the two-point discrimination test to help assess changes in light-touch sensibility.

Upper extremity impairments due to sensory deficits or pain resulting from peripheral nerve disorders are determined according to the grade of severity in diminution or loss of function and the relative maximum upper extremity impairment value of the nerve structure involved, as shown in the classification
(a) and procedural (b) steps described in Table 16-10 and the impairment determination method detailed in Section 16.5b. Table 16-10 provides a classification for determining impairment of the upper extremity due to a sensory deficit or pain resulting from a nerve disorder. This table is to be used for pain that is due to nerve injury or disease that has been documented with objective physical findings or electrodiagnostic abnormalities. It is not to be used for pain in the distribution of a nerve that has not been injured except in diagnosed cases of complex regional pain syndromes. The examiner must use clinical judgment to estimate the appropriate percentage of sensory deficits or pain within the range of values shown for each severity grade. The maximum value for each grade is not applied automatically.
-- chars 3671 --

Intercostobrachial (T1-T2) and
medial brachial cutaneous (T1)

Medial antebrachial cutaneous (C8, T1)
(Musculocutaneous nerve, C5-C7) Lateral antebrachial cutaneous
(Ulnar nerve, C8, T1)

(Radial nerve C5–C8)

Posterior brachial cutaneous
Inferior lateral  brachial
cutaneous

Posterior  antebrachial
cutaneous

--break--
16.5c Regional Impairment Determination Impairment of the peripheral nerve system may involve the structures listed below. The impairment determination method is detailed step by step in Section 16.5b.

• Spinal nerves C5 to C8 and T1
• Brachial plexus
• Major peripheral nerves

Spinal Nerves
Evaluating impairment of the spinal nerves due to injuries or disease is based on the severity of loss of function of the peripheral nerves receiving fibers from specific spinal nerves. Because each spinal nerve transmits fibers to more than one peripheral nerve, the loss of function is greater with the involvement of two or more spinal nerves transmitting fibers

superficial branch

(Median nerve, C6-C8, T1)
Palmar cutaneous
Palmar
 digitals

Palmar cutaneous

Palmar digitals

Dorsal cutaneous
Dorsal   digitals

Palmar digitals

Superficial
and dorsal digitals

(Median nerve, C6-C8, T1)
Palmar digitals

to the same peripheral nerve than with the involvement of a single spinal nerve. Therefore, in multiple spinal nerve involvement, the impairment is evaluated according to the brachial plexus values (Table 16-14) rather than combining the individual spinal nerve values shown in Table 16-13.

Adapted with permission from an original painting by F. H. Netter In: The Atlas of Human Anatomy. Summit, NJ: CIBA-GEIGY Corp; 1989.

Motor deficit calculation:
--break--
1. Muscle involved: deltoid, which is innervated by the axillary nerve (Table 16-12 and Figure 16-47).
--break--
2. Severity of motor deficit: grade 4 (1%-25%) (Table 16-11a). A severity rating of 25% was selected on clinical judgment because of the severity of the weakness.
--break--
3. Maximum upper extremity impairment due to motor deficit of the axillary nerve: 35% (Table 16-15).
--break--
4. Multiply the maximum upper extremity impairment for motor deficit of the axillary nerve (35%) by the severity of motor deficit (25%) to obtain the impairment of the upper extremity due to motor deficit of the axillary nerve, or 35% ? 25% = 9%.
Impairment Rating: Combined sensory and motor deficits: Combine 9% upper extremity motor deficit with 1% upper extremity sensory deficit (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to obtain 10% upper extremity impairment resulting from axillary nerve dysfunction. This corresponds to 6% whole person impairment (Table 16-3).

For example, the maximum upper extremity impairment due to combined motor and sensory deficits resulting from a lesion of the upper trunk (C5 and C6) is 81% (Table 16-14); however, combining the impairment values of the individual nerves C5 (34%) and C6 (40%), as shown in Table 16-13, results in 60% upper extremity impairment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604), which does not reflect the full severity of loss of function.
-- chars 3074 --

Table 16-13 provides maximum upper extremity impairment values for unilateral sensory and motor deficits of the spinal nerves that are most frequently involved. A spinal nerve–related impairment is determined according to the method detailed in Section
--break--
16.5b. Impairment of a specific spinal nerve that is not mentioned in this section should be estimated by considering the percents suggested for a nerve that has fibers from the specific spinal nerve. Bilateral involvements are discussed in the Impairment Determination Method (Section 16.5b), step 10.

Brachial Plexus
The brachial plexus innervates the shoulder girdle and upper extremity and is formed by the anterior primary divisions of the fifth through eighth cervical roots and the first thoracic root. These roots anastomose to form three primary trunks: upper trunk (C5 and C6), middle trunk (C7), and lower trunk (C8 and T1) (Figure 16-50). Specific findings result from the involvement of these structures.

† See Table 16-11a to grade motor deficit.

From Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of permanent impairment in the hand and upper extremity. In: Doege TC, ed. Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment. Fourth ed. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1993.

ateral pectoral Axillary
Medial brachial cutaneous

Long thoracic

Inferior subscapular
Medial antebrachial
cutaneous

† See Table 16-11a to grade motor deficit.

From Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of permanent impairment in the hand and upper extremity. In: Doege TC, ed. Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Imapirment. Fourth ed. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Assocation; 1993.

Entrapment neuropathy is a nerve compression–type lesion that implies disproportion between the volume of the peripheral nerve and the space through which it passes. The underlying causes may be intrinsic or extrinsic, in that the nerve itself or the other contents of the passage may be enlarged or the passage space may be narrowed. The differential diagnosis of entrapment neuropathy is extensive. The local causes can relate to specific anatomic variations in the configuration of bones or soft tissue resulting from chronic irritation or an inflammatory process such as tenosynovitis; mechanical causes such as blunt trauma, fractures, or scarring; or congenital anomalies such as aberrant muscles, arteries, or a cervical rib in the thoracic outlet region. Neoplastic conditions, such as myeloma or neurofibromatosis, or space-occupying lesions, such as ganglion, lipoma, or fibroma, must be ruled out. Predisposing or associated conditions can include diabetes, arthritis, alcoholism, renal disease, hormonal changes, malnutrition, or obesity.

† See Table 16-11a to grade motor deficits.

Fourth ed. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1993.

Peripheral nerves can become compressed at any level from the hand to the thoracocervical region. One nerve can be trapped simultaneously at two levels, or more than one nerve can be trapped. Certain anatomic constraints make particular nerves at specific sites more vulnerable, leading to well-defined patterns or syndromes. Generally, each nerve lesion can be described clinically as a high or a low lesion, that is, a high or a low median, radial, or ulnar lesion. The most frequently encountered entrapment is of the median nerve at the wrist, leading to the carpal tunnel syndrome, followed by the ulnar nerve at the elbow. The recurrent motor branch of the median nerve can be involved singly or in combination with the median nerve at the wrist. Knowledge
-- chars 3582 --

of normal and variant anatomy, both gross and microscopic, is essential for accurate diagnosis and precise localization of the lesion.

Diagnosis of Entrapment/Compression Neuropathy
The diagnosis of entrapment/compression neuropathy is based on (1) the history and symptoms;
(2) objective clinical signs and findings on detailed examination; and (3) documentation by electroneuromyographic studies. Standard roentgenograms and more involved imaging studies are also useful.

The history should include a listing of occupation(s), activities of daily living, factors that alleviate or aggravate the symptoms, medical conditions, and past surgical procedures or trauma. The entrapment of a major peripheral nerve or one of its branches is reflected by a disturbance of a specific motor, sensory, or autonomic function. Functionally, the symptoms may vary from slight paresthesia, motor weakness, or both to complete sensibility loss, muscle paralysis, or both. The severity of the nerve damage and symptoms depends on the duration, magnitude, and type of compression as well as on the microanatomy of the nerve involved.

The physical examination evaluates sensibility alterations, muscle power, range of motion, grip strength, and tendon reflexes. Increased pressure over an entrapped nerve, or its irritation by tapping or stretching, is reflected by paresthesia (sensation of electrical shock) in its autonomous zone and possibly by limitation of motion because of pain. Individuals with compression neuropathies show different patterns of loss and recovery than individuals with lacerations. They may have normal two-point discrimination but abnormal light-touch/deep-pressure recognition. SemmesWeinstein monofilament testing can be indicated in these cases. Provocative tests are helpful to induce clinical symptoms; these include, for example, the tourniquet, Phalen’s or reverse Phalen’s, elbow flexion, and Adson’s tests. Nerve percussion tests are performed distal to proximal and then directly over the area of a sensitive cutaneous or major mixed nerve.
Testing of Tinel’s sign should be reserved for regenerating nerves to document the progress and speed of axon regeneration after repair of a lacerated nerve or decompression of a severely compressed nerve.

The electroneurodiagnostic examination includes electromyographic (needle and cutaneous) examinations, which evaluate only motor unit potentials, and motor and sensory nerve conduction studies. These procedures assess only the largest, most heavily myelinated axons; the lightly myelinated and unmyelinated axons that transmit pain are not directly evaluated. A fundamental point is that, regardless of the cause of nerve damage, the electrodiagnostic studies essentially can detect only two types of pathophysiology of the peripheral nerve system fibers: (1) axon loss (axonotmetic lesion), which is manifested as conduction failure, and (2) focal demyelination (neuropraxic lesion), which can cause either conduction slowing or conduction block, depending on the severity of the process. The severity of conduction slowing has no correlation with the severity of clinical symptoms, such as weakness or static large-fiber sensory loss. If these are present, substantial amounts of either conduction block, axon loss, or a combination of both must be present.
-- chars 3333 --

Impairment Rating of Entrapment/Compression Neuropathies Only individuals with an objectively verifiable diag-
nosis should qualify for a permanent impairment rating. The diagnosis is made not only on believable symptoms but, more important, on the presence of positive clinical findings and loss of function. The diagnosis should be documented by electromyography as well as sensory and motor nerve conduction studies. However, it is critical to understand that there is no correlation between the severity of conduction delay on nerve conduction velocity testing and the severity of either symptoms or, more important, impairment rating. The surgical findings of evidence of nerve compression and reactive hyperemia upon nerve release help confirm the diagnosis.

Postoperatively, a sufficient amount of time for optimal physiologic recovery and rehabilitation should elapse before an individual qualifies for permanent impairment rating should there be residual symptoms or clinical findings. Factors affecting nerve recovery in compression lesions include nerve fiber pathology, level of injury, duration of injury, and status of the end organs. Age is not a prognostic factor. Sensory function usually returns before motor function. High axonotmetic lesions may take 1 to 2 years for maximal recovery, whereas even lesions at the wrist may take 6 to 9 months for maximal recovery of nerve function. During the recovery time, individuals can experience some of the preoperative symptoms. An advancing Tinel’s sign can be monitored and is a good prognostic sign.

The sensory deficits or pain, and/or the motor deficits and loss of power, are evaluated according to the impairment determination method described in Section 16.5b. Sensory impairments strictly due to lesions of digital nerves are evaluated according to Section 16.3. In compression neuropathies, additional impairment values are not given for decreased grip strength. In the absence of CRPS, additional impairment values are not given for decreased motion. In the presence of associated CRPS II (causalgia), the compression neuropathy is evaluated according to the principles of CRPS II described in Section 16.5e.

Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
The carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is the most common of nerve compression lesions and involves the median nerve at the volar aspect of the wrist. There are many presentations of CTS. Pain and paresthesias in the median nerve distribution of the hand are the usual symptoms. Pain may radiate proximally. Nocturnal paresthesias, relieved by shaking the hand, are frequently reported and can be the only symptom in the earliest stages of nerve pathology. True sensory disturbances and muscle atrophy represent later stages, when axonotmesis with axonal degeneration is also present. The symptoms, signs, and findings may include sensory or autonomic disturbances of the radial 31/2 digits, weakness or atrophy of the thenar muscles, a positive percussion sign at the wrist, presence of Phalen’s sign, and motor and sensory electroneuromyographic abnormalities. Not all symptoms are necessarily present in any one case. In isolated involvement of the recurrent branch of the median nerve, there is weakness of thumb abduction and thenar atrophy without any sensory disturbance in the hand. Sensitivity to cold may be a major presenting symptom of CTS. Certain cases may be associated with reflex dystrophy (CRPS I). It has also been reported that 5% of individuals with CTS may have normal electrophysiologic studies.
-- chars 3522 --

If, after an optimal recovery time following surgical decompression, an individual continues to complain of pain, paresthesias, and/or difficulties in performing certain activities, three possible scenarios can be present:

--break--
1. Positive clinical findings of median nerve dysfunction and electrical conduction delay(s): the impairment due to residual CTS is rated according to the sensory and/or motor deficits as described earlier.
--break--
2. Normal sensibility and opposition strength with abnormal sensory and/or motor latencies or abnormal EMG testing of the thenar muscles: a residual CTS is still present, and an impairment rating not to exceed 5% of the upper extremity may be justified.
--break--
3. Normal sensibility (two-point discrimination and Semmes-Weinstein monofilament testing), opposition strength, and nerve conduction studies: there is no objective basis for an impairment rating.

--break--
16.5e Complex Regional Pain Syndromes (CRPS), Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (CRPS I), and Causalgia (CRPS II)
The hallmark of these syndromes is a characteristic burning pain that is present without stimulation or movement, that occurs beyond the territory of a single peripheral nerve, and that is disproportionate to the inciting event. The pain is associated with specific clinical findings, including signs of vasomotor and sudomotor dysfunction and, later, trophic changes of all tissues from skin to bone.

Sympathetic nervous system dysfunction was thought to be involved in the generation of the symptoms and signs; hence, the term reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD). Causalgia was considered similar to RSD except, unlike RSD, it followed a lesion of a peripheral nerve, either of a major mixed nerve in the proximal extremity (major causalgia) or of a purely sensory branch more distally (minor causalgia). A recent reconsideration of these syndromes has generated new terminology and ideas concerning the underlying pathophysiology. The International Association for the Study of Pain has proposed the term complex regional pain syndromes, which has replaced the term RSD with CRPS I and causalgia with CRPS II. The most important difference from earlier opinions is that sympathetic dysfunction is not assumed to be the underlying basis for the symptoms and signs of CRPS. It is felt that sympathetically maintained pain is not an essential component of CRPS, as it may be present in a variety of painful conditions, including or independent of CRPS. Contrary to previous suggestions, regional sympathetic blockade has no role in the diagnosis of CRPS.

Since a subjective complaint of pain is the hallmark of these conditions, and many of the associated physical signs and radiologic findings can be the result of disuse, the differential diagnosis is extensive; it includes somatoform pain disorder, somatoform conversion disorder, factitious disorder, and malingering. Consequently, the approach to the diagnosis of these syndromes should be conservative and based on objective findings. The criteria listed in Table 16-16 predicate a diagnosis of CRPS upon a preponderance of objective findings that can be identified during a standard physical examination and demonstrated by radiologic techniques. At least eight of these findings must be present concurrently for a diagnosis of CRPS. Signs are objective evidence of disease perceptible to the examiner, as opposed to symptoms, which are subjective sensations of the individual.
-- chars 3470 --

Modified from Ensalada LH. Complex regional pain syndrome. In: Brigham CR, ed.
The Guides Casebook. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1999:14.

CRPS I (RSD) Impairment Determination
In CRPS I, neither the initiating causative factor nor the symptoms involve a specific peripheral nerve structure or territory. The impairment determination is derived as follows:

--break--
1. Rate the upper extremity impairment resulting from loss of motion of each individual joint involved (Section 16.4).
--break--
2. Rate the upper extremity impairment resulting from sensory deficits and pain according to the grade that best describes the severity of interference with activities of daily living as described in Table 16-10a. Use clinical judgment to select the appropriate severity grade and the appropriate percentage from within the range shown in each grade. The maximum value is not automatically applied. The value selected represents the upper extremity impairment. A nerve value multiplier is not used.
--break--
3. Combine the upper extremity value for loss of joint motion (step 1) and pain and sensory deficits (step 2) to determine the upper extremity impairment due to CRPS I (Combined Values Chart,
p. 604).
--break--
4. Convert the upper extremity impairment to whole person impairment by using Table 16-3.

In contrast to CRPS II, impairment values for sensory and motor deficits of a specific nerve structure cannot be applied. No additional impairment is assigned for decreased pinch or grasp strength. The impairment rating method described for sensory deficits due to lesions of digital nerves is not applied in CRPS.

CRPS II (Causalgia) Impairment Determination
In CRPS II, a specific sensory or mixed nerve structure is involved. The impairment determination is derived as follows:

--break--
1. Rate the upper extremity impairment due to loss of motion of each individual joint involved (Section 16.4).
--break--
2. Rate the upper extremity impairment resulting from sensory deficits and pain of the injured nerves according to the determination methods described in Section 16.5b and Table 16-10a. Use clinical judgment to select the appropriate severity grade and the appropriate percentage from within the range shown in each grade.

--break--
3. Rate the upper extremity impairment resulting from motor deficits and loss of power of the injured nerve according to the determination method described in Section 16.5b and Table 16-11a.
--break--
4. Combine the upper extremity impairment percents for loss of joint motion (step 1), pain and sensory deficits (step 2), and motor deficits (step 3), if present, to determine the upper extremity impairment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604). Severe CRPS II may result in complete loss of function and in impairment of the extremity as great as 100%.
--break--
5. Convert the upper extremity impairment to whole person impairment by using Table 16-3.

No additional impairment is given for decreased pinch or grip strength. The impairment rating method described for sensory deficits resulting from lesions of digital nerves is not applied in CRPS.
-- chars 3119 --

--break--
16.6 Impairment of the Upper Extremities Due to Vascular

orders
The criteria for evaluating Raynaud’s phenomena and other extremity impairments due to peripheral vascular disorders resulting from diseases of the arteries, veins, or lymphatics is discussed in Chapter 4, The Cardiovascular System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries, Section 4.3.

Table 16-17 provides a similar classification of impairments due to peripheral vascular disease. Physical signs of vascular damage must be present and are the primary determinants in placing the examinee into one of these categories. Raynaud’s phenomenon consists of localized blanching of one or more fingers, followed by a period of cyanosis, followed by erythema. Pain on exposure to cold or generalized paleness of the fingers on exposure to cold does not in itself indicate Raynaud’s phenomenon. When amputation because of peripheral vascular disease is involved, the impairment resulting from amputation should be evaluated according to Section
--break--
16.2 and combined with the appropriate value in Table 16-17 by means of the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

It is important to differentiate symptoms of Raynaud’s phenomenon on the basis of obstructive physiology from those occurring because of vasoreactivity. Individuals with obstructive physiology will often experience symptoms more frequently and with a greater degree of severity. Establish the presence of obstructive physiology by objective testing. Arterial pressure ratios between the affected digits and the brachial pressure (finger/brachial index) are easily performed. A ratio of < 0.8 suggests obstructive physiology, even if Raynaud’s symptoms are not present. Obstructive physiology can also be established by the use of cutaneous laser Doppler flowmetry. This technique is established and can reliably assess microcirculation performance and real-time changes in skin blood flow.

Impairment of 0% to 9% is indicated by documented Raynaud’s phenomenon with obstructive physiology (as documented by finger-brachial indices of less than 0.8 or low digital temperatures with decreased laser Doppler signals that do not normalize with warming of affected digits) that completely responds to lifestyle changes and/or medical therapy.

Impairment of 10% to 39% is indicated by symptoms of Raynaud’s phenomenon with obstructive physiology (as documented by finger-brachial indices of less than 0.8 or low digital temperatures with decreased laser Doppler signals that do not normalize with warming of affected digits) that incompletely responds to lifestyle changes and medical therapy.

The hand impairment value of each digit is the same throughout this entire chapter. If more than one
joint of a specific digit is affected by impairments due to “other disorders” listed in this section, the applicable joint impairment ratings are added only when the joints involved have a full range of motion. Otherwise, the joint impairment values are combined using the Combined Values Chart.
-- chars 3014 --

Skin disorders, including disfigurement, scars, and skin grafts, are evaluated using criteria in Chapter 8, The Skin.

Impairments from the disorders considered in this section under the category of “other disorders” are usually estimated by using other impairment evaluation criteria. The criteria described in this section should be used only when the other criteria have not adequately encompassed the extent of the impairments. Some of the conditions described in this section can be concurrent with each other and with decreased motion because they share overlapping pathomechanics. The evaluator must have good understanding of pathomechanics of deformities and apply proper judgment to avoid duplication of impairment ratings.

--break--
16.7a Bone and Joint Deformities
If the same unit presents several findings, the following rules must be followed to avoid duplication of impairments. In the digits, wrist, and elbow, manifestations of joint translocation can include lateral deviation, rotational deformity (digit), and/or subluxation or dislocation in any combination. The impairment values due to these findings cannot be combined, and only the finding with the highest impairment value is rated. Limited motion impairment is rated according to Section 16.4 and can be appropriately combined with impairments due to “other disorders” listed in this section, except with those due to joint swelling from synovial hypertrophy, persistent joint subluxation or dislocation, and musculotendinous disorders (Section 16.7c). Joint instability impairment values can be combined with other appropriate impairment values, including decreased motion, but not with arthroplasty. Joint swelling due to synovial hypertrophy is rated only when no other findings are present. Joint crepitation is not rated separately because other findings, such as those listed above, are more reliable indicators of the severity of the same arthritic process.

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.

Joint Swelling Due to Synovial Hypertrophy Synovial hypertrophy is a sign of an inflammatory arthritic process that can progress through varying the manifestations listed above, including decreased motion. If synovial hypertrophy is the only finding, the joint impairment is rated according to Table 1619 and multiplied by the relative maximum value of the joint involved (Table 16-18). It cannot be combined with impairment due to decreased joint motion or other findings.

Digit Lateral Deviation
The deviation from longitudinal alignment of each of the digital joints is measured in degrees during maximum active extension. Since lateral deviation at any level affects the longitudinal arch of the digit, the deviation impairment value is applied to the entire digit. If lateral deviation is the only impairment, the severity of digit impairment (Table 16-20) is multiplied by the relative hand value of the digit (Table
-- chars 3176 --
--break--
16-18) to determine the hand impairment. The lateral deviation impairment percent can be combined with other impairments of the same digits, including motion, according to the rules outlined on page 499 (Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.

roentgenographic findings. The severity categories cannot be added or combined. The selected upper extremity impairment value may be combined only with limited wrist motion. Pain and decreased strength are not rated separately.

The scapholunate and radiolunate angles are measured on a lateral radiograph taken with the fist forcefully clenched (stressed view) and the wrist in neutral flexion/extension and lateral deviation. Lines are drawn on the film parallel to the long axis of the radius, through the long axis of the scaphoid (palmar surface), and a line representing the long axis of the lunate (a line perpendicular to the line connecting the two distal poles [Figure 16-51]). The angles between these lines are measured. The normal radiolunate relationship should be less than 10° of either volar or dorsal lunate angulation. The scapholunate angle ranges from 30° to 60° (average of 47°). The triquetrolunate stepoff is measured on the neutral posteroanterior (PA) view and represents proximal or ulnar translation of the triquetrum. The scapholunate gap is best profiled on a neutral PA view with the ulnar aspect of the hand elevated 10° to 15° or on a neutral anteroposterior (AP) view.

Ulnar translation may occur secondary to injury or arthritis. It is measured on the neutral PA view with the fist forcefully clenched. Normally, greater than 50% of the lunate overlies the ulnar border of the distal radius. As ulnar translation becomes more severe, progressively less of the lunate overlies the radius. The grades of severity of upper extremity impairment are classified as mild (8%), wherein less than 50% of the lunate overlies the distal radius ulnar

border; moderate (16%), wherein less than 25% of the lunate overlies the distal radius ulnar border; and severe (24%), wherein the lunate is displaced ulnarly off the radius (Table 16-25).

The loading posterior/anterior drawer test is performed with the individual supine and the shoulder in neutral rotation, 60° abduction, and 30° flexion. One hand stabilizes the extremity in neutral rotation, and the other applies a posteriorly directed force to subluxate the shoulder posteriorly. The position of the examiner’s hands is reversed to reproduce the maneuver applying an anteriorly directed force. Note that in a clinical setting, the examiner can usually evaluate the severity of instability without inducing a shoulder dislocation.

The posterior/anterior glenohumeral translation has been classified as follows:
-- chars 3048 --
Trace: Small movement of the humeral head.
Class I: Humeral head rides up the glenoid but not over the rim.
Class II: Humeral head subluxes over the glenoid rim but reduces spontaneously in position when the axial load is withdrawn.
Class III: Humeral head frankly dislocates over the glenoid rim and remains dislocated with removal of force.

The apprehension and relocation tests are best carried out with the individual in a supine position. The anterior apprehension test is performed by applying external rotation as the shoulder is held in 90° abduction. If the test is positive, the individual fears that the humeral head will slide out, causing pain.
Muscular defense against the motion is usually present. However, presence of pain alone is not necessarily diagnostic of instability. The anterior relocation test (Jobe’s) is performed by applying a posteriorly directed force to the proximal humerus while the shoulder is in 90° abduction and external rotation with the individual supine. This posterior stabilizing force should reduce the humeral head and relieve any apprehension of anterior instability.

Shoulder instability patterns are based on the parameters listed in Table 16-26 and can be classified as occult instability, instability with a subluxating humeral head, and instability with a dislocating humeral head. The shoulder representing 60% of the upper extremity (Table 16-18), the patterns of occult (10%), subluxating (20%), and dislocating (40%) instabilities represent upper extremity impairments of 6%, 12%, and 24%, respectively. This value may be combined only with impairments due to decreased motion (Section 16.4). Pain and decreased muscle strength are not rated separately.

Analysis: According to Table 16-26, a class II humeral translation (subluxating head) with a history of previous trauma, consistent relationship of symptoms with specific motions, reproducible symptoms on clinical testing, and positive radiographic findings corresponds to 12% upper extremity impairment.
The upper extremity impairment due to decreased shoulder motion is found in Section 16.4: IADD% = 0% and IABD% = 2% (Figure 16-43); IIR% = 0%
and IER% = 0% (Figure 16-46). The upper extremity motion impairment is 2%.
Impairment Rating: The upper extremity impairments due to shoulder instability (12%) and decreased motion (2%) are combined (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) and equal 14% of the upper extremity, or 8% of the whole person (Table 16-3).

Compiled by EG McFarland, MD, Baltimore, Maryland.

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.

CMC: thumb carpometacarpal; IP: thumb interphalangeal; MP: metacarpophalangeal; PIP: proximal interphalangeal; DIP: distal interphalangeal.

Modified from Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Principles and methods of impairment evaluation in the hand and upper extremity. In: Engelberg AE, ed. Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment. Third ed. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1989:47; prepared with the assistance of DM Lichtman, Fort Worth, Texas, and EG McFarland, Baltimore, Maryland.
-- chars 3181 --

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.

Extensor Tendon Subluxation at the MP Joint of the Fingers
The digit impairment due to extensor tendon subluxation at the metacarpophalangeal (MP) joint (Table 1630) is multiplied by the relative hand value of the digit (Table 16-18) to obtain its hand impairment value. It cannot be combined with impairment due to restricted motion at the MP joint or to other related manifestations of the same pathomechanical disturbance.

--break--
16.7 d Tendinitis
Several syndromes involving the upper extremity are variously attributed to tendinitis, fasciitis, or epicondylitis. The most common of these are the stubborn conditions of the origins of the flexor and extensor muscles of the forearm where they attach to the medial and lateral epicondyles of the humerus. Although these conditions may be persistent for some time, they are not given a permanent impairment rating unless there is some other factor that must be considered.

If an individual has had tendon rupture or has undergone surgical release of the flexor or extensor origins or medial or lateral epicondylitis, or has had excision of the epicondyle, there may be some permanent weakness of grip as a result of the tendon rupture or the surgery. In this case, impairment can be given on the basis of weakness of grip strength according to Section 16.8b. Although there is no good data on the time required to regain maximum strength after surgery, the data on strength loss after carpal tunnel release suggests that impairment rating according to Section 16.8b should not be determined less than 1 year after surgery.

--break--
16.8 Strength Evaluation
Because strength measurements are functional tests influenced by subjective factors that are difficult to control and the Guides for the most part is based on anatomic impairment, the Guides does not assign a large role to such measurements. Those who have contributed to the Guides believe that further research is needed before loss of grip and pinch strength is given a larger role in impairment evaluation.

Strength measures the power with which musculotendinous units act across a bone-joint lever-arm system to actively generate motion, or passively resist movement against gravity and variable resistance.
The effectiveness and magnitude of muscle contraction depends on the integrity of the dynamic and passive elements of a complex lever system, including its muscles and tendons, normal passive motion in the joints across which the muscles act, and the quality of innervation of the muscles. Many subjective or nonmeasurable factors, including fatigue, handedness, time of day, age, nutritional state, pain, and the individual’s cooperation, further influence strength measurements. Voluntary muscle strength testing remains somewhat subjective until a precise way of measuring muscle contraction is generally available. It should also be noted that the correlation of strength with performance of activities of daily living is poor and that increased strength does not necessarily equate with increased function.
-- chars 3349 --

--break--
16.8 a Principles
In a rare case, if the examiner believes the individual’s loss of strength represents an impairing factor that has not been considered adequately by other methods in the Guides, the loss of strength may be rated separately. An example of this situation would be loss of strength due to a severe muscle tear that healed leaving a palpable muscle defect. If the examiner judges that loss of strength should be rated separately in an extremity that presents other impairments, the impairment due to loss of strength could be combined with the other impairments, only if based on unrelated etiologic or pathomechanical causes. Otherwise, the impairment ratings based on objective anatomic findings take precedence.
Decreased strength cannot be rated in the presence of decreased motion, painful conditions, deformities, or absence of parts (eg, thumb amputation) that prevent effective application of maximal force in the region being evaluated.

Motor weakness associated with disorders of the peripheral nerve system and various degenerative neuromuscular conditions are evaluated according to guidelines described in Section 16.5 and the Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System. It should be understood that weakness or loss of strength can occur without muscle atrophy.

When evaluating strength, the examiner must have good reason to believe the individual has reached maximal medical improvement and that the condition is a “permanent” one as defined in Chapter 1 and the Glossary. Maximum strength is usually not regained for at least a year after an injury or surgical procedure. Because impairment is evaluated when the individual has reached MMI, strength can only be applied as a measure when a year or more has passed since the time of injury or surgery. This determination is best made with measurements taken over a period of time. Two methods are used to determine loss of strength in the upper extremity. Measurements of grip and pinch strength are used to evaluate power weaknesses relating to the structures in the hand, wrist, or forearm.
Manual muscle testing of major groups is used for testing strength about the elbow and shoulder.

--break--
16.8b Grip and Pinch Strength
Tests repeated at intervals during an examination are considered to be reliable if there is less than 20% variation in the readings. If there is more than 20% variation in the readings, one may assume the individual is not exerting full effort. The test is usually repeated three times with each hand at different times during the examination, and the values are recorded and later compared.

Grip strength measurements must be performed in a standard manner because altering wrist, forearm, and/or elbow position will change the results. The generally accepted position for measurements is for the individual to be seated with back against the chair and feet flat on the floor. The arm should be relaxed beside the lateral torso, the elbow flexed at 90°, and the forearm and wrist in neutral position. Grip strength measurements may be taken with a Jamar dynamometer. The second (4 cm) or third
-- chars 3131 --
(6 cm) position, according to the size of the hand, usually allows the individual to apply maximal force comfortably.

Two techniques have been reported to help detect individuals who exert less than maximal effort on grip strength testing. Stokes pointed out that the plotting of grip strength measurements from each of the five handle settings of the Jamar dynamometer would produce a bell-shaped curve. Those individuals not exerting maximal effort will produce results yielding a straight line or a flat curve.

An alternate method is the rapid exchange grip technique. The grip strength first is determined by standard techniques. The individual then is instructed to grip the dynamometer with maximal effort, first with one hand, then quickly with the other hand, for at least five exchanges. Individuals who did not exert maximal effort with the standard technique will record significantly higher strength readings. If they become aware of this, the strength of both hands will drop dramatically.

Pinch strength measurements are done with a pinch gauge and may include chuck or three-digit pinch, key or lateral pinch, and tip pinch with separate digits. Key pinch measurements usually are sufficient. Measurements are repeated three times. The three readings each for grip and pinch strength are averaged and compared to those of the opposite extremity, which usually is normal. If both extremities are involved, the strength measurements are compared to the average normal strengths listed in Tables 16-31 through 16-33.

Adapted with permission from Swanson AB, Matev IB, de Groot Swanson. The strength of the hand. Bull Prosthet Res. Fall 1970:145-153.

Adapted with permission from Swanson, AB, Matev IB, de Groot Swanson. The strength of the hand. Bull Prosthet Res. Fall 1970:145-153.

Adapted with permission from Swanson AB, Matev IB, de Groot Swanson. The strength of the hand. Bull Prosthet Res. Fall 1970:145-153.

If there is evidence that the individual is exerting less than maximal effort, the grip strength measurements are invalid for estimating impairment. It is acknowledged that wide variations exist in strength, even among persons doing the same kind of work. Little evidence exists of a significant difference in grip strength between the dominant and nondominant hand. If the evaluator believes that a significant difference in grip strength was lost in the dominant hand and that it impacts the ability to perform activities of daily living, this should be addressed in the evaluation report (see Section 16.1b).

An index of loss of strength uses the following formula:

Normal strength – Limited strength = Strength loss Normal strength
index %

Impairments of the upper extremity due to loss of pinch and grip strength are based on the values of the strength loss index shown in Table 16-34.

Rate the function that measures the greatest loss of strength. Both measurements are not applied.

--break--
16.8c Manual Muscle Testing
Manual muscle testing assesses an individual’s ability to move a joint through a full range of motion against gravity, or move it against additional resistance applied by the examiner, and/or hold the joint position against resistance. Manual muscle testing is subject to the individual’s conscious or unconscious control. Individuals whose performance is inhibited by pain or fear of pain may not be good candidates for this testing. Results of strength testing should be reproducible on different occasions or by two or more trained observers.
-- chars 3514 --

† Complete range of motion against gravity only without resistance.

‡ Complete range of motion against gravity with some resistance.

Derived from Section 16.4 and Table 16-11 by G. de Groot Swanson, Grand Rapids, Michigan.

Upper extremity impairment ratings for strength deficits about the elbow and shoulder (Table 16-35) were derived by multiplying the maximum relative value of each unit of motion by the percentage of severity of strength deficit found on manual muscle testing. The relative functional value of each unit of motion is the same as in Section 16.4, Evaluating Abnormal Motion. The severity of strength deficits is classified and rated on the same principles used for evaluation of the peripheral nerves (Table 16-11).
The numeric grades are sometimes also named 5, normal; 4, good; 3, fair; 2, poor; 1, trace; and 0, no muscle contraction. In the absence of peripheral nerve involvement, most weaknesses usually fall in the grade 4 category: “complete active range of motion against gravity with some resistance.” Few injuries result in a more profound weakness, such as a grade 3 category: “complete active range of motion against gravity only, without resistance.” Muscle strength graded 3 or lower is usually accompanied by other clinical findings such as atrophy. Because the functional units of motion of each joint were assigned on a 100% scale, the upper extremity impairment values derived for weakness of each unit of motion are added directly together.

loss from digital nerve lesions (Section 16.3;
Figures 16-6 and 16-7; and Tables 16-6
and 16-7).
Note: Impairment related to neuromas of digital nerves is discussed in Section 16.3c.
--break--
3. Individual joint impairment due to abnormal motion (Section 16.4: thumb IP, p. 454;
MP, p. 456; CMC, p. 458; finger DIP, p. 462; PIP, p. 462; MP, p. 464).
Note: The motion impairments at the DIP, PIP, and MP joints of the fingers are combined
(p. 465 and Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine the digit impairment. The thumb motion impairments at the IP, MP, and CMC joints are added (p. 460).
--break--
4. Individual digit impairments due to other disorders (Section 16.7).
--break--
5. Total individual digit impairment: combine impairments due to amputation (step 1), sensory loss (step 2), abnormal motion (step 3), and other disorders (step 4)(Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
--break--
6. Convert individual digit impairments to hand impairments (Table 16-1).
--break--
7. Total hand impairment: add the hand impairment values contributed by each digit.
--break--
8. Convert the total hand impairment to impairment of the upper extremity (Table 16-2).
--break--
9. If applicable, add the upper extremity impairment due to thumb amputation proximal to the MP joint (Table 16-4) to the upper extremity impairment derived from the hand region (step 8).
--break--
10. If applicable, determine the upper extremity impairment due to loss of strength and combine with the upper extremity impairment derived from the hand region (step 8).
-- chars 3025 --
--break--
11. If no other upper extremity impairment exists, convert the upper extremity impairment related to the hand region to an impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3).
--break--
12. If other impairments of the upper extremity are present, enter the upper extremity impairment value due to the Hand Region on Line II of Part 2 of the Evaluation Record.

II. Determine the upper extremity impairment derived from the Wrist, Elbow, and Shoulder Regions and enter on the appropriate space or line of Upper Extremity Evaluation Record, Part 2 (Figure 16-1).

--break--
1. Wrist Region
Determine upper extremity impairments due to loss of motion (Section 16.4g) and other disorders (Section 16.7), and combine the values to determine the upper extremity impairment related to the wrist region. Enter on line II.
--break--
2. Elbow Region
Determine upper extremity impairments due to loss of motion (Section 16.4h) and other disorders (Section 16.7), and combine the values to determine the upper extremity impairment related to the elbow region. Enter on line II.
--break--
3. Shoulder Region
Determine upper extremity impairments due to loss of motion (Section 16.4i) and other disorders (Section 16.7), and combine the values to determine the upper extremity impairment involving the shoulder region. Enter on line II.

III. Determine the upper extremity impairment due to amputation through the arm or forearm (Section 16.2b) and enter on line I of the Evaluation Record, Part 2.

IV. Determine the upper extremity impairment due to peripheral nerve disorders (Section 16.5) and enter on line III of the Evaluation Record, Part 2.

V. Determine the upper extremity impairment due to peripheral vascular disorders (Section 16.6) and enter on line IV of the Evaluation Record, Part 2.

VI. Determine the upper extremity impairments due to other disorders not included in regional impairment (Section 16.7) and enter on line V of the Evaluation Record, Part 2.
VII.
Determine the total upper extremity impairment and enter on the bottom of Part 2 of the Record.
Combine the upper extremity impairments due to amputation (other than hand) (Line I of Part 2), regional disorders (hand, wrist, elbow, shoulder) (Line II of Part 2), peripheral vascular disorders (Line III of Part 2), peripheral nerve disorders (Line IV of Part 2), and other disorders not included in regional impairment (Line V of Part 2) (Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

VIII. Convert the upper extremity impairment to a whole person impairment (Table 16-3).

IX. When both upper extremities are involved, derive the whole person impairment percent for each and then combine both values using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

--break--
16.10  Clincal Examples
Supination
--break--
30°
IS % = 2%
Add the upper extremity impairments contributed by the elbow units of motion: 3% + 2% + 5% impairment.
Impairment Rating: Combine the upper extremity regional impairments: 12% (wrist) and 5% (elbow) = 16% impairment of the upper extremity (Combined Values Chart, p. 604), or 10% impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3).
-- chars 3094 --

• Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
†Use Table 16-2 (hand to upper extremity).
§Use Table 16-3. Courtesy of G. de Groot Swanson, MD, Grand Rapids, Michigan.
• Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
If both limbs are involved, calculate the whole person impairment for each on a separate chart and combine the percents (Combined Values Chart).
• Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
†Use Table 16-2 (hand to upper extremity).
§Use Table 16-3. Courtesy of G. de Groot Swanson, MD, Grand Rapids, Michigan.

================================================================================
Chapter 17:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Lower Extremities
17.1 Principles of Assessment
17.2 Methods of Assessment
17.3 Lower Extremity Impairment Evaluation Procedure Summary and Examples
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairment of the lower extremities, including impairment ratings that reflect an individual’s ability to perform the activities of daily living (ADL). For evaluation purposes, the lower extremities are divided into six sections: the feet, the hindfeet, the ankles, the legs, the knees, the hips, and the pelvis. In addition to the skeletal framework, assessment of the lower extremities also requires an assessment of its joints and the associated soft tissues, vascular system, and nervous system. The lower extremities are evaluated on the basis of anatomic changes, diagnostic categories, and functional changes. Impairment evaluations pertain to conditions that have reached maximum medical improvement (MMI), as defined in Chapter 1 and the Glossary.

The following revisions have been made for the fifth edition: (1) The principles of assessment have been expanded to clarify when the different evaluation methods should be used; (2) a new table, Guide to the Appropriate Combination of Evaluation Methods (Table 17-2), has been added to indicate which methods are appropriate to use in combination;
(3) the evaluation of causalgia and complex regional pain syndrome now follows the same principles used to evaluate central nervous system lesions;
(4) additional case examples are provided; and (5) a lower extremity worksheet is provided as a template to simplify making the assessment and recording the evaluation.

--break--
17.1 Principles of Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

The evaluation should include a comprehensive, accurate medical history; a review of all pertinent records; a comprehensive description of the individual’s current symptoms and their relationship to daily activities; a careful and thorough physical examination; and all findings of relevant laboratory, radiologic (imaging), and ancillary tests. It is also essential that the rater include in the report a description of how the impairment was calculated. Because many ratings are reviewed by other physicians and third-party administrators, the explanation of the calculation will lead to a better understanding of the method used and the report will be considered more reliable.
-- chars 3404 --

--break--
17.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
-------INTRODUCTION START (History)-------
History
The case history should be based mainly on the individual’s own statements rather than on secondhand information. The evaluator should consider information from other sources, including medical records. The physician should use this information cautiously, especially if it is subjective. It is not appropriate to question the individual’s integrity. If information from the individual is inconsistent with what is known about the medical condition, the circumstances, or the written record, this should be reported and comment should be included about the inconsistencies.

The medical history must describe the chief complaint. Discuss the quality, frequency, duration, and anatomic location of pain, numbness, paresthesias, and weakness in detail. Further, report how the condition interferes with daily activities. The physician should elicit the facts about when and how the condition started and the relationship to any related problems elsewhere in the lower extremity or in other areas of the musculoskeletal system, such as the spine. The report should describe any precipitating events or factors.

Ideally, include the individual’s description as to how the symptoms developed and the assumed cause. In addition, discuss the results of special studies and treatment. The physician should review available xrays and other imaging studies personally or report the findings as being those of another reviewer (based on reports). A review of organ systems and of the general medical history can provide potentially helpful information, including complicating medical problems that can affect the diagnosis and care plan.

Examination
Physical examination of nonmusculoskeletal areas (eg, the nervous system) is discussed in other parts of the Guides. A targeted neurologic assessment is needed for individuals with lower extremity problems. Guided by the history and physical examination, the physician records lower extremity–related physical findings, such as range of motion, limb length discrepancy, deformity, reflexes, muscle strength and atrophy, ligamentous laxity, motor and sensory deficits, and specific diagnoses such as fractures and bursitis.

Neurologic examination of the lower extremities includes measurement of knee and ankle reflexes and motor and sensory functions. It is important to ensure that lower extremity impairment discussed in this chapter is not due to underlying spine pathology. If lower extremity impairment is due to an underlying spine disorder, the lower extremity impairment would, in most cases, be accounted for in the spine impairment rating.

The Lower Extremities
--break--
525

--break--
17.1 b Description of Clinical Studies
Specific Lower Extremity Techniques
The physician needs to review and record findings from diagnostic studies, including laboratory tests, electromyographic, vascular, and roentgenographic studies, CT scans, and MRI studies with or without contrast. A summary of the studies should be included as a separate paragraph or section. While imaging and other studies may assist physicians in making a diagnosis and help determine the method for assessment, they are not the sole determinants.
-- chars 3273 --

--break--
17.2 Methods of Assessment
Thirteen methods can be used to assess the lower extremities, as listed in Table 17-2. Table 17-1 classifies the 13 methods into three non–mutually exclusive categories to reflect their primary mode of assessment: (1) anatomic, (2) functional, or (3) diagnosis based. Detailed discussions of each method are provided in the sections noted.

Anatomic changes, including range of motion (ROM), any limb length discrepancy, arthritis, skin changes, amputation, muscle atrophy, nerve impairment, and vascular derangement are assessed in the physical examination and supported with clinical studies. Arthritis has its own diagnostic category, which applies to individuals with documented arthritis who are impaired by pain, weakness, or stiffness, but who have maintained functional ranges of motion. Arthritis is evaluated based on narrowing of the joint space as measured from x-rays. Causalgia and complex regional pain syndrome (reflex sympathetic dystrophy) are evaluated using a combination of ROM and peripheral neurologic evaluation techniques.

Diagnosis-based estimates are used to evaluate impairments caused by specific fractures and deformities, as well as ligamentous instability, bursitis, and various surgical procedures, including joint replacements and meniscectomies. In certain situations, diagnosis-based estimates are combined with other methods of assessment.

Functional impairments are chosen for conditions when anatomic changes are difficult to categorize or when functional implications have been documented. Functional impairments are assessed last.

The evaluator should read this chapter in its entirety and understand and follow the evaluation methods using the worksheet given in Figure 17-10 at the end of the chapter or a similar, comprehensive checklist. The evaluator’s first step is to establish the diagnosis(es) and whether or not the individual has reached MMI. The next step is to identify each part of the lower extremity that might possibly warrant an impairment rating (pelvis, hip, thigh, etc, down to the toes). Figure 17-10 lists potential methods for each lower extremity part. The evaluator determines whether ROM impairment or other regional impairments are present for each relevant part and records the impairment values in the appropriate locations on the worksheet. The selection of the most specific method(s) and the appropriate combination are
later considerations.
After all potentially impairing conditions have been identified and the correct ratings recorded, the evaluator should select the clinically most appropriate (ie, most specific) method(s) and record the estimated impairment for each. The cross-usage chart (Table 17-2) indicates which methods and resulting impairment ratings may be combined. It is the responsibility

of the evaluating physician to explain in writing why a particular method(s) to assign the impairment rating was chosen. When uncertain about which method to choose, the evaluator should calculate the impairment using different alternatives and choose the method or combination of methods that gives the most clinically accurate impairment rating.
-- chars 3174 --

X = Do not use these methods together for evaluating a single impairment. 0 = See specific instructions for CRPS of the lower extremity.

The Lower Extremities
--break--
527

Typically, one method will adequately characterize the impairment and its impact on the ability to perform ADL. In some cases, however, more than one method needs to be used to accurately assess all features of the impairment. When more than one rating method is used, the individual impairment ratings are combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

Avoid combining methods that rate the same condition. Selecting the optimal approach or combining several methods requires judgment and experience. A careful examination and review of supporting material is essential to produce accurate and consistent results. If more than one method can be used, the method that provides the higher rating should be adopted.

--break--
17.2 a Converting From Lower Extremity to Whole Person Impairment
To make this chapter easier to use, the tables in this chapter show the impairment percentages of the whole person, the lower extremity, and the specific lower extremity part together. The whole person impairments are not in parentheses; the lower limb impairment percents are in parentheses ( ); and, when applicable, the specific part impairments are in brackets [ ]. To calculate the lower extremity impairment percent from a specific part impairment percent (eg, foot), multiply by 0.7. To calculate whole person impairment from a lower extremity impairment, multiply by 0.4. These values are shown in Table 17-3.
Some individuals may have several impairments involving different parts of the same lower extremity; others may have several impairments of the same lower extremity part. If there are several impairments involving different regions of the lower extremity (eg, the thigh and the foot), evaluate each impairment separately, convert these regional impairments to whole person impairments, and combine the whole person impairment rating using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604). If there are multiple impairments within a region (eg, the toes and the ankle), combine these regional, lower extremity impairments of the foot and convert the combined foot impairment to a whole person impairment. Similarly, when using separate methods on the same region, combine the regional impairments before converting to a whole person impairment rating.

The 13 assessment methods listed in Table 17-1 are discussed separately below.

--break--
17.2 b Limb Length Discrepancy
To determine limb length discrepancy, place the individual supine on the examination table with the legs in the same position, measure the distance between the anterior superior iliac spine and the medial malleolus on the involved side, and compare it with the opposite side. To identify where on the leg the discrepancy is, the knee is flexed to 90° while the feet are kept flat on the table. If one knee is higher than the other, the tibia is longer on that leg. Another method sometimes used is to evaluate the level of the iliac crest when the individual is standing. This is not recommended because differences in iliac crest levels may be due to pelvic obliquity, flexion, or adduction deformity of the hip. When these reasons exist for the obliquity, it is referred to as apparent leg length discrepancy.
-- chars 3361 --

Both clinical methods have at least a 0.5to 1.0-cm variance, and both measurements are difficult to perform in a person with pelvic angulation, knee flexion contracture, or significant ankle edema. For this reason, teleroentgenography is recommended. If surface measurements with a tape measure from the anterior superior iliac spine to medial malleolus are used, they should be repeated three times and averaged to reduce measurement error. Impairments from limb length discrepancy depend on the magnitude of the leg length difference and are provided in Table 17-4. When applicable, the leg length discrepancy impairment is combined with other impairments.

In case of shortening due to overriding or malalignment or fracture deformities, but not to include flexion or extension deformities, combine the following values with other functional sequelae, using the Combined Values Chart:

--break--
1.25 cm (0-1/2 in) = 5% of lower extremity 1.25-2.5 cm (1/2-1 in) = 10% of lower extremity 2.5-3.75 cm (1-11/2 in) = 15% of lower extremity 3.75-5.0 cm (11/2-2 in) = 20% of lower extremity

The Lower Extremities
--break--
529

shortening results in an impairment of 5% of the leg, or 2% impairment of the whole person.
Because the teleroentgenography is more accurate than tape measurements, especially in an obese individual (as this person was), it is the preferred method of determining leg length. Limb shortening may be combined with other methods (eg, diagnosis of femur fracture, as listed in Table 17-2).

--break--
17.2c Gait Derangement
Gait derangement is present with many different types of lower extremity impairments and is always secondary to another condition. An impairment rating due to a gait derangement should be supported by pathologic findings, such as x-rays. Except as otherwise noted, the percentages given in Table 17-5 are for full-time gait derangements of persons who are dependent on assistive devices.

Whenever possible, the evaluator should use a more specific method. When the gait method is used, a written rationale should be included in the report.
The lower limb impairment percents shown in Table 17-5 stand alone and are not combined with any other impairment evaluation method.

Section 17.2c does not apply to abnormalities based only on subjective factors, such as pain or sudden giving-way, as with, for example, an individual with low-back discomfort who chooses to use a cane to assist in walking.
--break--
17.2d Muscle Atrophy (Unilateral)
In evaluating muscle atrophy, the leg circumference should be measured and compared to the opposite leg at equal distances from either the joint line or another palpable anatomic structure. For example, a thigh atrophy may involve measuring the thigh circumference with a tape measure 10 cm above the patella and comparing it to a similar measure on the other leg. Calf circumference is compared at the maximum level bilaterally. Neither limb should have swelling or varicosities that would invalidate the measurements. Diminished muscle function can be estimated using four different methods. Only one should be used; that is, use only one method for assessing muscle function. Atrophy ratings should not be combined with any of the other three possible ratings of diminished muscle function (gait derangement, muscle weakness, and peripheral nerve injury). When muscle dysfunction is present, assess the condition with all four methods. Use the method that most accurately and objectively reflects the individual’s impairment. Atrophy at both the thigh and calf is evaluated separately and the whole person impairment combined. Impairment ratings from atrophy
-- chars 3652 --
are provided in Table 17-6.

--break--
17.2e Manual Muscle Testing
Manual muscle testing, which typically involves groups of muscles, depends on the examinee’s cooperation and is subject to his or her conscious and unconscious control. To be valid, the results should be concordant with other observable pathologic signs and medical evidence. In general, this method is best used for pathology that does not have a primary neurologic basis, eg, a compartment syndrome or direct muscle trauma. Weakness caused by an identifiable motor deficit of a specific peripheral nerve should be assessed according to Section 17.2l, Peripheral Nerve Injuries.

Measurements can be made by one or two observers. If the measurements are made by one examiner, they should be consistent on different occasions. If made by two, they should be consistent between examiners. Even in a fully cooperative individual, strength may vary from one examination to another, but not by more than one grade. If they vary by more than one grade between observers, or by the same examiner on separate occasions, the measurement should be considered invalid. In those individuals, impairment estimates should not be made using this section.
Individuals whose performance is inhibited by pain or the fear of pain are not good candidates for manual muscle testing, and other evaluation methods should be considered for them. Table 17-7 shows the criteria on which estimates and grades of the lower extremity’s strength are based, and Table 17-8 lists the actual ratings based on lower extremity weakness.
--break--
17.2f Range of Motion
Lower extremity impairment can be evaluated by assessing the range of motion of its joints, recognizing that pain and motivation may affect the measurements. If it is clear to the evaluator that a restricted range of motion has an organic basis, three measurements should be obtained and the greatest range measured should be used. If multiple evaluations exist, and there is inconsistency of a rating class between the findings of two observers, or in the findings on separate occasions by the same observer, the results are considered invalid. Figures 17-1 to 17-6 illustrate one method of measuring range of motion in the lower extremity. The ranges listed in Tables
--break--
17-9 through 17-14 are examples of mild, moderate, and severe impairments and are to be used as guides. Range-of-motion restrictions in multiple directions do increase the impairment. Add range-of-motion impairments for a single joint to determine the total joint range-of-motion impairments. For example, hip motion is evaluated and any impairment added in each of the six principal directions of motion.
Figure 17-1 Using a Goniometer to Measure Flexion of the Right Hip*

(a) Goniometer is placed at the right hip, and the pelvis is locked in the neutral position by flexing the left hip until the lumbar spine is flat.
(b) Examinee flexes the right hip until the anterior superior iliac spine begins to move, when the angle is recorded.
-- chars 3023 --
(c) To measure loss of extension of the right hip, the left hip is flexed until the lumbar spine is flat on the examining table, as determined by the examiner’s hand, which is placed between the lumbar spine and table surface. The right thigh should rest flat on the table;
any right hip flexion is recorded as a flexion contracture.

Figure 17-3 Measuring Internal and External Hip Rotation*

The examinee is prone on a flat surface, and the knee is flexed 90°. One part of the goniometer is parallel to the flat surface, and the other is along the tibia. While testing, the examiner should place the hand on the knee to determine whether there is significant laxity of the knee joint. Keep the pelvis flat on the table.
Neutral

Figure 17-5 Measuring Foot Dorsiflexion and Plantar Flexion

The goniometer’s pivot is centered over the ankle, and one arm parallels the tibia. The examiner reads the angles subtending the maximum arcs of motion for dorsiflexion and plantar flexion. The test is repeated with the knee flexed to 45°. The averages of the maximum angles represent dorsiflexion and plantar flexion ranges of motion.

Rosemont, Ill: American Orthopaedic Association; 1966.

Figure 17-4 Measuring Knee Flexion

(a) The examinee is supine and the goniometer is next to the knee joint; one goniometer arm is parallel to the lower leg, and the other is parallel to the femur. Any deviation from 0° is recorded.
(b) The examinee exerts maximum effort to flex the knee. The flexion angle is obtained from the goniometer.
Figure 17-6 Evaluating the Range of Motion of a Toe: the Metatarsophalangeal (MTP) Joint of the Great Toe

(a) The examinee is seated in the position for evaluation of the toes. The knee is flexed to 45°, and the foot and MTP joint are in the neutral position.
(b) Extension: The goniometer is under the MTP joint, and its angle is read as a baseline. The examinee extends (dorsiflexes) the toe maximally, and the angle subtending the maximum arc of motion is read; the baseline angle is subtracted.
(c) Flexion: The goniometer is placed over the MTP joint. The baseline angle is read. The examinee plantar flexes the MTP joint maximally. The angle subtending the maximum arc of motion is read, and the baseline angle is subtracted.

The Lower Extremities
--break--
537
Range-of-motion impairment values for the lower extremity are listed in Tables 17-9 to 17-14.

The maximum whole person impairment percent for impairment of two or more lesser toes of one foot is 2%.
--break--
17.2g Joint Ankylosis
An immobile joint is an impairment even when the position of ankylosis is optimal. Malposition in angulation or rotation of an arthrodesed or fused joint increases the magnitude of the impairment.
Surgical correction usually is preferable to accepting a significant malposition, but it is not always possible or practical. Impairment estimates for malposition are therefore included for the infrequently encountered individual who is not a candidate for surgical correction.
-- chars 3003 --

The following text and Tables 17-15 through 17-30 indicate the optimal neutral positions for ankyloses of the lower extremity joints and provide the impairment percents for ankyloses in those optimal positions.
Any variation from the optimal neutral position of an ankylosed joint increases the baseline impairment percent as indicated in the tables. The values listed are for the maximum end of the deformity range.
Specific deformities should be rated using interpolation of the ranges in the tables as illustrated by examples in this section. Multiple malposition deformities of the same joint, ie, angulation and malrotation, are added, whereas deformities of different joints are combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604). The baseline rating for ankylosis in the neutral position is used only once for each joint. As noted elsewhere, added or combined impairment ratings can never exceed 100% of the lower extremity.

Hip
The optimal position of ankylosis is 25° to 40° flexion and neutral rotation, adduction, and abduction. This position represents a 20% whole person impairment and a 50% lower extremity impairment.

Tables 17-15 through 17-19 provide impairment estimates for hip ankyloses in various positions. See Figures 17-1 through 17-3 for illustration of the measurement of hip motion and ankylosis.
Impairment estimates for rotation, abduction, and adduction deformities are added. The maximum hip impairment or lower limb impairment is 100%, which is a 40% whole person impairment.
Knee
The optimal position is 10° to 15° of flexion with neutral alignment. Figure 17-4 shows how the goniometer is used to measure knee flexion. Ankylosis in the optimal position is a 67% lower extremity impairment or 27% whole person impairment.

Impairments beyond those of the optimal position are evaluated according to Tables 17-20 through 17-23. Malpositions of the knee include varus, val-
gus, and malrotation deformities, which can increase the impairment up to 100% impairment of the lower extremity.

The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.
The optimal ankylosis position is the neutral position without flexion, extension, varus, or valgus. Ankylosis of the ankle in the neutral position is a 4% whole person impairment, a 10% lower extremity impairment, and a 14% foot impairment. A variation from the neutral position should be evaluated according to Tables 17-24 through 17-28. The maximum impairments are 25% whole person impairment, 62% lower extremity impairment, and 88% ankle impairment. Figure 17-5 illustrates a measurement of dorsiflexion and plantar flexion.

The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.

The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.

The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.
-- chars 3104 --
Foot (Hindfoot, Midfoot, Forefoot)
For the subtalar part of the foot, the optimal ankylosis position is neutral, or 0°, without varus or valgus. The ankylosis impairment in the neutral position is 4% for the whole person, 10% for the lower extremity, and 14% for the foot. Malpositioning may increase the whole person impairment up to 25%.
Varus or valgus malpositioning is estimated in the same way as for the ankle (Tables 17-25 and 17-26).

Ankylosis impairment for loss of the tibia–os calcis angle is estimated according to Table 17-29. The tibia–os calcis angle is made by the longitudinal axis of the os calcis and the longitudinal axis of the tibia with the ankle in neutral position (Figure 17-7).
For pantalar ankylosis, the optimal position is neutral; the impairment estimates for that position are 10% for the whole person, 25% for the lower extremity, and 35% for the foot. Further flexion, varus, and valgus impairments are estimated as shown in Tables 17-25 to 17-29.

Toes
Figure 17-6 illustrates the use of a goniometer to measure a toe’s range of motion. Table 17-30 provides impairment estimates related to ankylosis of one or several toes.
--break--
17.2h Arthritis
Roentgenographic grading systems for inflammatory and degenerative arthritis are well established and widely used for treatment decisions and scientific investigation. For most individuals, roentgenographic grading is a more objective and valid method for assigning impairment estimates than physical findings, such as the range of motion or joint crepitation. While there are some individuals with arthritis for whom loss of motion is the principal impairment, most people are impaired more by pain and sometimes weakness, but they still can maintain functional ranges of motion, at least in the early stages of the process. Range-of-motion techniques are therefore of limited value for estimating impairment secondary to arthritis in many individuals. Crepitation is an inconstant finding that depends on such factors as forces on joint surfaces and synovial fluid viscosity.

Certain roentgenographic findings that are of diagnostic importance, such as osteophytes and reactive sclerosis, have no direct bearing on impairment. The best roentgenographic indicator of disease stage and impairment for a person with arthritis is the cartilage interval or joint space. The hallmark of all types of arthritis is thinning of the articular cartilage; this correlates well with disease progression.

The need for joint replacement or major reconstruction usually corresponds with complete loss of the articular surface (joint space). The impairment estimates in a person with arthritis (Table 17-31) are based on standard x-rays taken with the individual standing, if possible. The ideal film-to-camera distance is 90 cm (36 in), and the beam should be at the level of and parallel to the joint surface. The estimate for the patellofemoral joint is based on a “sunrise view” taken at 40° flexion or on a true lateral view.
-- chars 3005 --

In the case of the knee, the joint must be in neutral flexion-extension position (0°) to evaluate the x-rays. Impairments of individuals with knee flexion contractures should not be estimated using x-rays because measurements are unreliable. In these individuals, the range-of-motion method should be used. X-rays of the hip joint are taken in the neutral position. The cartilage interval (joint space) of the hip is relatively constant in the various positions; therefore, positioning is not as critical as for the knee x-rays.
The ankle x-ray must be taken in a mortise view, which is 10° internal rotation: 10° flexion or extension is permissible. Evaluation of the foot joints requires a lateral view for the hindfoot and an anteroposterior view for the midfoot and forefoot. If there is doubt or controversy about the suitability of the

† In an individual with a history of direct trauma, a complaint of patellofemoral pain, and crepitation on physical examination. but without joint space narrowing on x-rays, a 2% whole person or 5% lower extremity impairment is given.

radiographic method in a specific individual, rangeof-motion techniques may be used instead.

A person who has an intra-articular fracture and subsequent rapid onset of arthritis should be evaluated using the arthritis section combined with Section
--break--
17.2j on diagnosis-based estimates.

--break--
17.2i Amputations
Impairments of the lower extremity due to amputations are estimated according to Table 17-32.

--break--
17.2j Diagnosis-Based Estimates
Some impairment estimates are assigned more appropriately on the basis of a diagnosis than on the basis of findings on physical examination. A good example is that of an individual impaired because of a successful replacement of a hip. This person may function well but require prophylactic restrictions of activities of daily living to prevent a further impairment, such as premature failure of the prosthesis.
Table 17-33 provides impairment estimates for certain lower extremity impairments. For most diagnosis-based estimates, the ranges of impairment are broad, and the estimate will depend on the clinical manifestations and their impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living. Hip replacements should first be rated using Table 17-34 and knee replacements using Table 17-35. The points obtained from the assessment are then applied to Table 17-33 for the diagnosis impairment rating. If limb length discrepancy also exists, that impairment rating should be combined with the impairment from
the joint replacement using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
† See Table 17-34 or Table 17-35 for point rating system.
‡ A stress x-ray is an anterior-posterior view taken with a varus or valgus stress applied by a knowledgeable physician.
§ The tibia–os calcis angle is measured as shown in Figure 17-7.

The Lower Extremities
--break--
547

Region and Condition
Total knee replacement including unicondylar replacement
Good result, 85-100 points† Fair results, 50-84 points†
-- chars 3033 --
Poor results, less than 50 points†

Proximal tibial osteotomy

Whole Person (Lower Extremity) [Foot] Impairment (%)

Region and Condition
Loss of tibia–os calcis angle§ Angle is 120°-110°

Angle is 100°-90° Angle is less than 90°

Intra-articular fracture with displacement

Whole Person (Lower Extremity) [Foot] Impairment (%)

--break--
5 (12) [17]

--break--
8 (20) [28]

+1 (2) [3] per degree up to
--break--
15 (37) [54]

Ligamentous instability (based on stress x-rays‡)
Mild (2-3 mm excess opening) Moderate (4-6 mm)
Severe (> 6 mm)

Fracture
Extra-articular with angulation 10°-14°
+1 (2) [3] per degree up to
--break--
15 (37) [53]

Moderate Severe
Avascular necrosis of the talus Without collapse

With collapse

Forefoot deformity
Metatarsal fracture with loss of weight transfer
--break--
1st metatarsal 5th metatarsal Other metatarsal

Intra-articular with displacement

Hindfoot
Fracture
Extra-articular (calcaneal)

With varus angulation 10°-19°

--break--
0.5 (1) [1] per degree up to
--break--
10 (25)

Metatarsal fracture with plantar angulation and metatarsalgia
--break--
1st metatarsal 5th metatarsal Other metatarsal

With valgus angulation 10°-19°

With valgus angulation 20°+
--break--
0.5 (2) [1] per degree up to
--break--
10 (25) [35]
The evaluating physician must determine whether diagnostic or examination criteria best describe the impairment of a specific individual. The evaluator should, in general, use only one approach for each anatomic part. There are, however, a few instances in which elements from both diagnostic and examination approaches will apply to a specific situation (see Figure 17-2). An individual with an acetabular fracture

and a sciatic nerve palsy should have estimates made for both the hip joint impairment and the nerve palsy. The estimates for the fracture and the nerve condition are then combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to provide the final impairment estimate. The final lower extremity impairment cannot exceed the impairment estimate for amputation of the extremity (100%), or 40% whole person impairment.

Fractures in and about joints with degenerative changes should be rated either by using this section and combining the rating with that for arthritis (Table 17-31 and Combined Values Chart, p. 604) or by using the loss of range-of-motion method. It is recommended that the method providing the greater of the two impairment estimates be used. A diagnosis of isolated full-thickness articular cartilage defects and ununited osteochondral fractures requires arthroscopic or surgical confirmation.
--break--
17.2k Skin Loss
Full-thickness skin loss about certain areas in the lower extremity results in significant impairment, as shown in Table 17-36, even when the areas are successfully covered with an appropriate type of skin graft. Chronic osteomyelitis is also evaluated using this method.

--break--
17.2l Peripheral Nerve Injuries
Peripheral nerve injuries are divided into two components: motor deficits and sensory deficits. Figures 17-8 and 17-9 show the sensory and motor nerves of the lower extremity. All estimates listed in Table 17-37 are for complete motor or sensory loss for the named peripheral nerves. Partial sensory and motor deficits should be rated as in the upper extremity (Tables 16-10 and 16-11). First identify the injured
-- chars 3341 --
nerve and find the maximum impairment of the lower extremity due to motor deficit in Table 17-37. Grade the severity of motor deficit of the individual muscle groups innervated by that nerve according to the classification given in Table 16-11. Assign a motor deficit concordant with that grade and multiply the maximum impairment value of the nerve for motor loss by the percent motor deficit to obtain the lower extremity impairment for this partial loss. Sensory deficits follow a similar method, as described in Table 16-10.
Motor and sensory estimates should be combined, but impairments from multiple peripheral nerve injuries should not exceed the whole person impairment from complete loss of a lower extremity (40%).

The Lower Extremities
--break--
551
Sensory deficits, including dysesthesias, are subjective and must be carefully evaluated. Ideally, two examiners should agree. Estimates for peripheral nerve impairments may be combined with those for other types of lower extremity impairments, except those for muscle weakness, atrophy, and gait derangement, using the Combined Values Chart
(p. 604). See cross-usage Table 17-2.

The Lower Extremities
--break--
553

--break--
17.2m Causalgia and Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy)
Causalgia is a burning pain resulting from injury of a peripheral nerve. As a term, complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is preferred to reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD) because the relationship to the sympathetic nervous system is uncertain. CRPS is characterized by pain, swelling, stiffness, discoloration, and skeletal demineralization, and it may follow a sprain, fracture or nerve or vascular injury. CRPS is further described in Section 13.8.
When causalgia or CRPS occurs in an extremity, the evaluator should use the method described in Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System.

--break--
17.2n Vascular Disorders
Table 17-38 classifies and provides criteria for impairments due to peripheral vascular disease of the lower extremity. When amputation due to peripheral vascular disease is involved, the impairment due to amputation should be evaluated according to the criteria in section 17.2i, and the impairment percent should be combined (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) with an appropriate percent based on Table 17-38 for the remaining vascular disease.
The Lower Extremities
--break--
555

--break--
17.3 Lower Extremity Impairment Evaluation Procedure Summary and Examples
When evaluating an individual with lower extremity impairment, first obtain the person’s detailed history and perform a thorough and careful physical examination, then follow the steps suggested below.

--break--
1. Establish the diagnosis.
--break--
2. Determine whether the individual has reached maximal medical improvement (MMI).
--break--
3. Identify each anatomic region of the lower extremity(ies) with abnormalities related to the illness/injury being evaluated. List potential methods. Use the worksheet shown in Figure 17-10.
-- chars 3014 --
--break--
4. Calculate the impairment according to the text and tables for each applicable method (Table 17-1).
--break--
5. Identify and calculate impairment related to the peripheral nervous system.
--break--
6. Identify and calculate impairment related to the peripheral vascular system.
--break--
7. Identify and calculate any impairment that is related to a complex regional pain syndrome.
--break--
8. If no other methods are available, use the gait derangement method if clinically applicable; document its validity.

--break--
9. Select the most appropriate method(s) based on the history and physical examination. Use the cross-usage table (Table 17-2) to ensure only the proper methods are combined. Although diminished muscle function can be evaluated by means of four methods (peripheral nervous system impairment, atrophy, manual muscle testing, or gait), use only the method that has the greatest specificity (eg, a peripheral nerve injury, if present). Anatomically based, specific methods are used to evaluate skin loss and osteomyelitis (Section 17.2k), peripheral nerve injuries (Section 17.2l), and vascular disorders (Section 17.2n). If a vascular impairment results in an amputation, any remaining vascular and amputation impairments are combined. Neurologic and vascular impairments are recorded separately since they are not limited to one region of the lower extremity. Gait derangements should be used only infrequently, when other, more specific measures are not appropriate.
--break--
10. If there are several alternatives, use the grouping that provides the greatest impairment percent. Convert a lower extremity impairment rating to whole person impairment using the appropriate tables. Combine whole person impairments for each injury/illness for the same extremity using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
--break--
11. If more than one leg is involved, each lower extremity is rated separately and converted to whole person; then both whole person ratings (right and left leg) are combined using the Combined Values Chart.
The Lower Extremities
--break--
559

Notice that to calculate the lower extremity impairment, all the impairment ratings must be calculated for the lower extremity. Thus, the lower extremity amputation impairment rating must be used, not the foot impairment rating. Calculating the whole person impairment by combining the lower extremity impairments and multiplying by 0.4 should be the same as converting each lower extremity impairment to whole person impairment and then combining the whole person impairments. In cases where they are not equal, the evaluator should use the higher rating.

The Lower Extremities
--break--
561

DBE = diagnosis-based estimates; DJD = degenerative joint disease (arthritis).
Box 17-1 Choosing a Lower Extremity Impairment Rating

--break--
1. Establish the diagnosis.

Right Lower Extremity
Anterior cruciate ligament tear; lateral meniscus tear; common peroneal nerve neuropraxia.
Left Lower Extremity
Fracture/dislocation, left great toe IP joint.
-- chars 3042 --

--break--
2. Determine whether MMI has been reached.

Right Lower Extremity
Right lower extremity injuries meet definitional requirements and MMI.
Left Lower Extremity
Left lower extremity injuries meet definitional requirements and MMI.

--break--
3. Identify each lower extremity anatomic region with abnormalities that are related to illness/ injury in question. List potential methods.

Right Lower Extremity Thigh—Atrophy Knee—Diagnosis-based estimate Calf—Atrophy
Left Lower Extremity
Great toe—Range of motion

--break--
4. Calculate impairment according to text and tables for each applicable method.

Right Lower Extremity
Thigh atrophy—3% impairment of the lower extremity (1% whole person impairment); see Table 17-6.
Partial lateral meniscectomy—2% impairment of the lower extremity (1% whole person impairment); see Table 17-33.
Calf atrophy—3% impairment of the lower extremity (1% whole person impairment); see Table 17-6.
Anterior cruciate laxity, mild—7% impairment of the lower extremity (3% whole person impairment); total diagnosis-based estimate combines 7% (ACL laxity) with 2% (for partial menisectomy) for a lower extremity diagnosis estimate of 9%.
Left Lower Extremity
Great toe range of motion—2% impairment of the lower extremity (1% whole person impairment); see Table 17-14.
--break--
5.
Identify and calculate illness/injury related to peripheral nervous system impairment.

Right Lower Extremity
Partial common peroneal nerve injury with some motor and sensory residuals.
Motor: According to Table 16-11, 4/5 evertor strength would allow for 25% of the motor value of the involved nerve (25% of 15% lower extremity impairment [see Table 17-37]) or approximately 4% of the lower extremity.
Sensory deficits: Partial; able to do all activities of daily living. Using Table 16-10 from The Upper Extremities as a guide, take the sensory deficit in the 25% sensory deficit category. This would be 25% of the total value of superficial peroneal nerve (7% is total value), which results in an impairment of approximately 2% of the lower extremity for partial sensory loss. Combine motor and sensory losses for total peripheral nerve impairment, which would be 4% of the lower extremity for motor losses and 2% for partial sensory losses, for a total rating of 6% of the lower extremity.
Left Lower Extremity
None.

--break--
6. Identify and calculate all illness/injury related to the peripheral vascular system.

Right Lower Extremity
None.
Left Lower Extremity
None.

--break--
7. Identify and calculate all injury impairment related to CRPS.

Right Lower Extremity
None.
Left Lower Extremity
None.

The Lower Extremities
--break--
563

--break--
8. If no other method is available, then determine impairment due to gait derangement if clinically applicable.

Right Lower Extremity
Not applicable.
Left Lower Extremity
Not applicable.

--break--
9. Consult lower extremity cross-usage table (Table 17-2) to determine possible method groupings.

Right Lower Extremity
Methods used: Atrophy; diagnosis-based estimate; peripheral nervous system.
-- chars 3071 --
Possible groupings: Atrophy alone; diagnosis-based estimate and peripheral nervous system.
Left Lower Extremity
Range of motion only method available; no specific grouping used since single parameter present.

--break--
10. Consider all medical data available and select the largest and most clinically appropriate methods for each illness/injury; combine each parameter within each individual grouping in order to determine impairment for each leg. Numeric figures should be in whole person units.

Right Lower Extremity
Use diagnosis-based estimate combined with peripheral nervous system injury. That is, combine 9% impairment of the lower extremity with 6% impairment of the lower extremity, which results in an impairment rating of 14% of the right lower extremity for this illness/injury.
Left Lower Extremity
Range of motion is the only parameter available; for that reason, the rating is 2% impairment of the left lower extremity.

--break--
11. Use the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to combine whole person impairments from each regional impairment calculated in step 10 of the same limb. This allows the examiner to determine the lower extremity rating for that particular extremity. The lower extremity impairment rating for each limb is then converted to whole person impairment using Table 17-3. If both lower extremities are involved, the impairment rating for each extremity is first converted to a whole person impairment before being combined with
the whole person impairment for the contralateral extremity.

Right Lower Extremity
Final impairment is 14% of the lower extremity as the only condition being rated due to the injuries to the knee and common peroneal nerve. Therefore, the 14% lower extremity impairment is converted to 6% whole person impairment.
Left Lower Extremity
The IP fracture/dislocation was the only illness/injury rated in the left lower extremity. Therefore, the 2% lower extremity impairment rating does not need to be combined with any other illnesses/injuries in the left lower extremity. The final rating is 2% of the lower extremity or 1% whole person impairment.

Now that the lower extremity impairment rating for each limb has been converted to a whole person impairment rating, the two whole person ratings for each limb are then combined to give the final whole person impairment for this particular individual. The 6% whole person impairment for the right lower extremity is combined with 1% whole person impairment for the left lower extremity, resulting in a total whole person impairment rating of 7%.

================================================================================
Chapter 18:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Pain
18.1 Principles of Assessment
18.2 Overview of Pain
18.3 Integrating Pain-Related Impairment Into the Conventional Impairment Rating System
18.4 Behavioral Confounders
18.5 How to Rate Pain-Related Impairment: A Sample Protocol
18.6 Psychogenic Pain
18.7 Malingering
18.8 Conclusion
-- chars 3008 --
18.9 Case Examples
-------INTRODUCTION START -------
Introduction
This chapter provides information that will enable physicians to understand pain and develop a method to distinguish pain that accompanies illnesses and injuries from pain that has become an autonomous process, and provide physicians with a qualitative method for evaluating permanent impairment due to chronic pain.

This chapter has been completely revised from the fourth edition. Its new features include (1) an overview of pain; (2) a discussion of the complexity of assessing impairment due to pain; (3) a review of situations in which pain is a major cause of suffering, dysfunction, or medical intervention rather than a part of injuries and illnesses of specific organ systems as covered in other chapters of the Guides; (4) a qualitative method for evaluating impairment due to chronic pain; and (5) a description of when to use the methods described in this chapter and how they can be integrated with the impairment rating methods used in other chapters of the Guides.
Physicians need to use their clinical judgment as to what constitutes normal or expected pain in conditions that produce widely variable amounts of pain; a herniated lumbar disk, for example, may be completely painless or incapacitatingly painful. This chapter focuses on those situations in which the pain itself is a major cause of suffering, dysfunction, or medical intervention. Pain as considered in this chapter is persistent, which is not to say that it is refractory to all treatment, but that it is likely to be permanent and stationary.

--break--
18.1 Principles of Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

It is considerably more difficult to provide a method for assessing chronic, persistent pain than acute pain. In chronic pain states, there is often no demonstrable active disease or unhealed injury, and the autonomic changes that accompany acute pain, even in the anesthetized individual, are typically absent. Historically, it was assumed that pain derived from underlying peripheral tissue pathology and that its severity should correlate highly with the identified pathology. Current research, however, shows that pain perception is less a moment-to-moment analysis of afferent input than a dynamic process influenced by the effects of past experiences. Sensory stimuli act on neural systems that have been modified by earlier inputs, and the output of these systems is significantly influenced by the “memory”
of these prior events.

--break--
18.2  Overview of Pain
--break--
18.2a Definitions
Pain is defined by the International Association for the Study of Pain1 as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage or described in terms of such damage.”
-- chars 3099 --

Pain is a plural concept with biological, psychological, and social components. Its perception is influenced by cognitive, behavioral, environmental, and cultural factors. At first glance, it seems at odds with scientific medicine because of the difficulty accounting for it with obvious pathophysiologic changes.

Pain is subjective. Its presence cannot be readily validated or objectively measured. Physicians are confronted with ambiguity as they attempt to assess the severity and significance of chronic pain in their patients. In large part, this stems from the fundamental divide between a person who suffers from pain and an observer who attempts to understand that suffering. Observers tend to view pain complaints with suspicion and disbelief, akin to complaints of dizziness, fatigue, and malaise. As Scarry remarked, “To have great pain is to have certainty, to hear that another person has pain is to have doubt.”2

The concept of chronic pain as an extension of acute nociceptive pain is not valid. Chronic pain is an evolving process in which injury may produce one pathogenic mechanism, which in turn produces others, so that the cause(s) of pain change over time.
Support for this concept includes evidence that primary afferent discharge actually has the ability to injure or kill spinal inhibitory neurons (excitotoxicity), leading to hyperexcitability due to disinhibition. Peripheral nerve injury can initiate evolving abnormalities in spinal cord neurons, which in turn generate abnormal responsiveness of thalamic neurons, which in turn generate cortical dysfunction. In time, these higher-level abnormalities may become independent of the abnormalities that produced them.3

Even in situations that might be expected to provide clear correlations between perceived pain and identified peripheral pathology, there are perplexing observations. For example, in up to 85% of individuals who report back pain, no pain-producing pathology can be identified4; conversely, some 30% of asymptomatic people have significant pathology on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)5 and computed tomographic (CT) scans6 that might be expected to cause pain. Headache is another common disabling condition in which impairment must be assessed primarily on the basis of individuals’ reports of pain rather than on tissue pathology or anatomic abnormality. The reason is straightforward: in the majority of cases there is no demonstrable tissue pathology. Thus, pain can exist without tissue damage, and tissue damage can exist without pain. In summary, there is no “pain thermometer,” that is, no biological measure that correlates highly with individuals’ complaints of pain.

--break--
18.2b Impact of Pain on Population Health and Disability
Pain is among the most common reasons for seeking medical attention, accounting for more than 70 million office visits to physicians each year.7 It is also the most common cause of disability, with chronic low back pain alone accounting for more disability than any other condition, resulting in nearly 150 million lost work days in 1988.8 Disability related to back pain has increased dramatically, although there is no reason to suspect that back problems by themselves have increased.9,10 Headache disorders are also a major cause of work loss.11 Despite advances in physiologic understanding, surgical interventions, and pharmacologic therapies, the prevalence of chronic pain shows no signs of abating and continues to be of epidemic proportions. Notwithstanding this fact, the importance of pain is often discounted.
-- chars 3569 --
Morris has averred that pain reported by somebody else falls into the category we reserve for whatever is invisible, subjective, immaterial, and therefore unreal.12 A 1987 report of the Social Security Administration opined that it is impossible to understand the pain that another person is suffering.13

Pain is an essential determinant of the incapacitation of many individuals who undergo impairment evaluation. As observed by the Institute of Medicine Committee on Pain and Disability and Chronic Illness Behavior,14 “The notion that all impairments should be verifiable by objective evidence is administratively necessary for an entitlement program. Yet this notion is fundamentally at odds with a realistic understanding of how disease and injury operate to incapacitate people. Except for a very few conditions, such as the loss of a limb, blindness, deafness, paralysis, or coma, most diseases and injuries do not prevent people from working by mechanical failure. Rather, people are incapacitated by a variety of unbearable sensations when they try to work.”

When pain persists, it has the capacity to dominate a person’s existence, contributing to significant impairment, reduction in the quality of life, functional limitations, and disability. The ravages of chronic pain often extend beyond the person who has it, as the lives of family members are often dominated by the pain of a loved one. Indeed, the children of individuals with chronic pain are at risk for suffering a similar fate.15 In addition to the human costs, chronic pain is extremely costly to society. Medical expenditures for pain-related assessment and treatment, indemnity costs, loss of productivity, and loss of tax revenues are estimated to be $125 billion each year in the United States.16
--break--
18.2
c Medical Advances in Understanding and Managing Pain Behavioral/Psychological
Several major currents of thought and investigation in the last three decades have profoundly altered medical understanding of pain and its associated behaviors. The first was the behavioral hypothesis that much of the behavior associated with chronic pain was not intrinsic to a disease or injury but, rather, reflected environmental contingencies.17 This development led to the introduction of powerful clinical interventions, but it had the unfortunate effect of increasing skepticism about the validity of the suffering in those with persistent pain.

The considerable role of cognitive factors and coping skills in augmenting and mitigating the suffering and dysfunction of chronic pain has been compellingly demonstrated. These insights have provided the foundation of efficacious treatments.18

Associated with these developments has been the introduction of the term chronic pain syndrome (CPS) into common parlance. Although not official nomenclature, it is frequently used to describe an individual who is markedly impaired by chronic pain with substantial psychological overlay.19 CPS is largely a behavioral syndrome that affects a minority of those with chronic pain. It may best be understood as a form of abnormal illness behavior that consists mainly of excessive adoption of the sick role. The term is useful in that it properly directs therapy toward the reversal of regression and away from an exclusive focus on elimination of nociception. It does not, however, substitute for a careful diagnosis of the physiologic, psychological, and conditioning components that comprise the syndrome. The term CPS must be used with caution, as grouping pain problems together under a generic disorder may mask and leave untreated important physiologic differences.
-- chars 3644 --

Neurophysiologic
A second major current has derived from explosive growth in our understanding of the pathophysiology of pain, which has rendered many older concepts untenable. Processes of peripheral and central sensitization have been clarified, along with such phenomena as the development of adrenergic sensitivity in injured nociceptive fibers and the accumulation of ion channels at sites of nerve injury, all of which may produce severe pain in response to trivial stimulation. Processes have been identified by which unilateral inflammation, trauma, or illness can lead to pain and sensitivity in uninvolved, often contralateral, structures. Physiologic

processes underlying such symptoms, which were often dismissed as “not real,” have been found at the level of the dorsal horn, thalamus, and sensory cortex. Intense stimulation and peripheral nerve damage have been found to induce persistent changes in the spinal cord that, over time, alter the receptive field mapping and the phenotype of neurons rostral to them, which in turn may induce changes at the cortical level. These findings are of major import. They demonstrate that pain need not be symptomatic of a disease or injury but, in fact, can become a disease unto itself.

A major implication of recent research on sensitization is that the failure of medical and surgical investigation to account for a given pain may result not from looking in the wrong place, but from looking at the wrong time. That is, the investigations may be directed toward the organ or body part that was historically responsible for the individual’s pain, but they may be unrevealing because the pain, having been initiated by an injury or illness in the past, is now relatively independent.

Although sensitization of the peripheral and central nervous system has been demonstrated repeatedly in basic neuroscience research, there are currently no widely accepted methods for determining whether the symptoms of an individual with chronic pain can be ascribed to sensitization. Thus, while the concept of sensitization is extremely important to a conceptual understanding of chronic pain, there is currently no systematic way to incorporate it into impairment ratings.

Implications
The scientific advances described above have important implications for the assessment of pain-related impairment. The AMA Guides as a whole embodies the premise that injuries and illnesses cause deficits in the functioning of organs or body parts, and these deficits can be quantitatively assessed during an impairment evaluation. In the simplest situations, an individual experiences a definite biological insult that creates a clear-cut abnormality in his or her biological functioning. This abnormality, in turn, leads directly to deficits in activities of daily living (ADL) that can be quantified during the course of an impairment evaluation. An example is an individual who sustains a below-elbow amputation in a sawmill accident.

The behavioral concept of CPS and the neurophysiologic concept of peripheral or central nervous system sensitization imply that pain and pain-related activity restrictions may be dissociated from the biological insult to which a person was exposed and from any measurable biological dysfunction in that person’s organs or body parts. Both concepts thus challenge the assumed linkages among biological insult, organ or body part dysfunction, and ADL deficits that are fundamental to the AMA rating system.
-- chars 3479 --

Physicians differ sharply in the way in which they conceptualize the relations among biological insult, measurable organ or body part dysfunction, and selfreported activity limitations in individuals with chronic pain. Some physicians have a low threshold for using diagnoses like “chronic pain syndrome” or “psychogenic pain” to describe these people. The diagnoses highlight the lack of association between the complaints of the individuals and any welldefined biological abnormality.

Other physicians attempt to link the complaints of pain patients to a biological abnormality. In general, they do this by employing one of two strategies. The first is to view the person as having an atypical presentation of a well-accepted syndrome. For example, thoracic outlet syndrome is a well-recognized condition that can be caused by measurable abnormalities in arterial, venous, or neural structures in the thoracic outlet. Some physicians view people with chronic pain and paresthesias in an upper extremity as having a variant of thoracic outlet syndrome, even though vascular studies and electrodiagnostic studies are either normal or equivocal.20 The other strategy is to construct diagnoses based on the person’s symptoms and on subjective physical examination findings. The assumption of physicians employing this strategy is that a biological underpinning for the symptoms exists, but that medical science has not yet identified it. For example, the diagnosis of fibromyalgia is based on individuals’ reports of widespread pain and their reports of tenderness during physical examination. Despite extensive research, no specific underlying biological abnormality has been discovered to explain the reports of these people.

Acrimonious debates have occurred between physicians who favor biological explanations for controversial pain syndromes and those who construe the syndromes as dissociated from any definable biological abnormality. The interpretation has significant practical implications because many of the administrative agencies that provide benefits for people
with impairments emphasize the importance of
(1) objective findings of biological dysfunction and
(2) a clear causal link between an index injury and an individual’s present symptoms and findings.
If a painful condition is construed as a CPS or a psychogenic pain syndrome, both of these criteria are violated.

The distinction between well-accepted conditions and those that are ambiguous or controversial is itself ambiguous. Sometimes disagreements arise about individuals with atypical presentations of well-recognized painful syndromes. The example of thoracic outlet syndrome was given above. Another example is a person with chronic low back pain,
vague symptoms in one lower extremity, and an MRI with questionable compromise of a lumbar nerve root. The person might be described as having an atypical presentation of a lumbar radiculopathy; an alternative assessment is that the individual has a nonspecific chronic pain syndrome involving the low back. In other instances, disagreements center around the validity of the diagnostic procedures used to diagnose conditions. For example, a practitioner of manual medicine might ascribe an individual’s back pain to a lumbar subluxation or torsion of the ilium, whereas physicians not practiced in manual medicine might discount these diagnoses because they do not accept the validity of the physical examination maneuvers underlying them. Finally, as in the case of fibromyalgia, reliable diagnostic criteria exist, but physicians disagree about whether the condition diagnosed by use of these criteria has a specific, definable biologic basis.
-- chars 3681 --

The controversies described above cannot be resolved in this chapter of the Guides for the simple reason that the medical community has not achieved consensus about how to construe such conditions as myofascial pain syndrome, fibromyalgia, and “disputed neurogenic” thoracic outlet syndrome.20 A practical approach for performing impairment ratings on individuals with ambiguous or controversial syndromes is given below.
--break--
18.3
Integrating PainRelated Impairment Into the Conventional Impairment Rating System
There are several difficulties associated with integrating pain-related impairment into an impairment rating system such as the Guides. A basic challenge for a system of rating pain-related impairment is to incorporate the subjectivity associated with pain into an impairment rating system whose fundamental premise is that impairment assessment should be based on objective findings. The inherent subjectivity of pain is incongruent with the Guides’ attempts to assess impairment on the basis of objective measures of organ dysfunction, as it requires that determinations of pain intensity and the restrictions imposed by it must be largely based on patients’ reports.

A second issue is that an individual’s pain behaviors are influenced by his or her social environment.
Impairment ratings are usually performed not to establish academic facts or to make treatment decisions but, rather, to establish the financial obligations of payers to individuals or, conversely, the entitlements of individuals to monetary rewards. Thus, the social context surrounding impairment ratings might provide an incentive for individuals to exaggerate their reports of pain so as to maximize awards.
Conversely, since insurance companies and government agencies often hire the professionals who perform impairment ratings, evaluators may have an incentive to doubt the complaints of individuals. An ideal rating system would validate the genuine suffering of individuals and resist influence by those who exaggerate their incapacitation for secondary gain. In the absence of objective criteria for assessing the severity and functional significance of pain, it has proved exceedingly difficult to achieve this goal.

Third, this chapter assesses pain qualitatively. Because percentages for pain-related impairment have not been used and tested on a widespread basis, as have other impairment ratings used in the Guides, it was decided that impairment ratings for pain disorders would not be expressed as percentages of whole person impairment. Future scientific evidence may emerge that will enable a more quantifiable approach to be adopted. Nevertheless, the value of a qualitative assessment is that any identification of a significant pain component warrants additional consideration when interpreting impairment ratings used for allocation of medical resources, work placement, or financial compensation.

Finally, at a practical level, a chapter of the Guides devoted to pain-related impairment should not be redundant of or inconsistent with principles of impairment rating described in other chapters. The Guides’ impairment ratings currently include allowances for the pain that individuals typically experience when they suffer from various injuries or diseases, as articulated in Chapter 1 of the Guides: “Physicians recognize the local and distant pain that commonly accompanies many disorders. Impairment ratings in the Guides already have accounted for pain. For example, when a cervical spine disorder produces radiating pain down the arm, the arm pain, which is commonly seen, has been accounted for in the cervical spine impairment rating” (p. 10). Thus, if an examining physician determines that an individual has pain-related impairment, he or she will have the additional task of deciding whether or not that impairment has already been adequately incorporated into the rating the person has received on the basis of other chapters of the Guides.
-- chars 3972 --

--break--
18.3a When This Chapter Should Be Used to Evaluate Pain-Related Impairment
Organ and body system ratings of impairment should be used whenever they adequately capture the actual ADL deficits that individuals experience. However, the organ and body system impairment rating does not adequately address impairment in several situations, discussed below.

When There Is Excess Pain in the Context of Verifiable Medical Conditions That Cause Pain Individuals in this group have pain associated with medical conditions that are verifiable by objective means. An example is an individual with a persistent lumbar radiculopathy following a lumbar diskectomy. Such an individual will usually have objective findings, including atrophy of the affected leg, muscle weakness, and MRI evidence of epidural scarring. An individual with these findings would receive an impairment rating of 10% on the basis of the DRE spine impairment rating system described in Chapter
--break--
15. Although the DRE rating is usually appropriate, some individuals with persistent lumbar radiculopathies report “excess” pain. That is, they report that their pain causes severe ADL deficits, suggesting a level of impairment greater than 10%. Procedures in this chapter can be used to assess this additional impairment and to classify it as mild, moderate, moderately severe, or severe.

When There Are Well-Established Pain Syndromes Without Significant, Identifiable Organ Dysfunction to Explain the Pain Individuals in this group have pain syndromes that are widely accepted by physicians based on the individuals’ clinical presentation but that are not associated with definable tissue pathology. These syndromes are not ratable under the conventional rating system and also they do not fit any of the other chapters in the Guides since there is no measurable organ dysfunction. Individuals with these well-established pain syndromes can be evaluated on the basis of concepts elaborated in this chapter. These individuals must have symptoms and signs that can plausibly be attributed to a well-defined medical condition. Some of the most common of these syndromes are listed in Table 18-1. The list is not comprehensive and may change as the body of medical information about various pain syndromes grows. If an examiner determines that an individual has a diagnosis that is not
on the list, he or she may rate the individual’s pain-
related impairment if he or she is convinced that the diagnosed condition is well recognized and that the pain-related impairment is a consequence of the condition. An explanation should be provided in writing.

When There Are Other Associated Pain Syndromes
Use this chapter to evaluate pain-related impairment when dealing with syndromes with the following characteristics: (a) They are associated with identifiable organ dysfunction that is ratable according to other chapters in the Guides; (b) they may be associated with well-established pain syndromes, but the occurrence or nonoccurrence of the pain syndromes is not predictable; so that (c) the impairment ratings provided in other chapters of the Guides do not capture the added burden of illness borne by individuals who have the associated pain syndromes.
-- chars 3236 --

If the answer to all three of the above questions is yes, the examiner should consider the individual’s pain-related impairment to be ratable and should proceed according to the rating protocol described in Section 18.3d. If the answer to any of the above three questions is no, the examiner should consider the individual’s pain-related impairment to be unratable on the basis of concepts in this chapter. In that instance, he or she should still use the assessment protocol described in Section 18.3d to determine the severity and impact of the individual’s pain and report the results. That is, even if the examiner considers the person to have unratable pain, he or she needs to characterize the apparent pain-related impairment.

The fact that pain-related impairment may be unratable either on the basis of the organ and body rating system or on the basis of this chapter highlights the limits that exist in the science and practice of impairment evaluation. The judgment that pain-related impairment is unratable does not mean that the evaluating physician considers the pain to be “unreal” or fabricated. In fact, individuals with ambiguous or controversial pain syndromes may suffer from severe pain and report significant restrictions in ADL. These reports are often corroborated by information provided by family members and treating physicians.
Thus, when a physician judges pain-related impairment to be unratable, he or she is simply asserting an inability to determine how the activity restrictions reported by an individual are linked to a disease or injury. The decision regarding how to construe these reports must therefore be administrative, not medical.

Advances in diagnostic technology and clinical experience may eventually make pain-related impairment rating feasible for individuals with ambiguous or controversial pain syndromes. At the present time, however, the best option available to an examiner is to report that the individual has apparent impairment that is unratable on the basis of current medical knowledge. Insurance companies and administrative agencies that dispense benefits for impairments will need to make the final decision about how to use this information.

--break--
18.3c Administrative Issues Associated With Pain-Related Impairment
In essence, this chapter divides apparent impairment into three categories: (1) impairment ratable on the basis of the conventional rating system used throughout Guides Chapters 3 through 17; (2) pain-related impairment ratable according to concepts outlined in this chapter; and (3) pain-related impairment that is unratable according to the concepts outlined in this chapter.

There are two major reasons why these distinctions are crucial. First, agencies that provide benefits for individuals with impairments function under different legal mandates with respect to pain-related impairment. For example, workers’ compensation laws in some states mandate that pain-related impairment be considered in disability awards for injured workers.21 In other states pain-related impairment is not considered.22
-- chars 3092 --

The system described here distinguishes between an impairment rating using the organ system approach and impairment awarded on the basis of pain. This distinction permits administrative agencies to count “conventional” impairment ratings and pain-related impairment ratings on an equal footing, to discount pain-related impairment ratings, or to disregard them entirely. Similarly, the present system identifies individuals with unratable pain-related impairment so that administrative agencies can make informed decisions about whether or not to compensate these individuals.

Second, the distinction between ratable and unratable pain-related impairment embodies a key premise of this chapter: physicians do not currently possess reliable, valid techniques for assessing impairment associated with pain in all clinical settings. It is then more appropriate for the examining physician to describe the individual’s pain-related impairment as unratable than to give a rating that cannot be supported by either scientific evidence or consensus.

--break--
18.3d How to Rate Pain-Related Impairment: Overview
The system described in this chapter relies largely on self-reports by individuals. Thus, it differs significantly from the conventional rating system, which relies primarily on objective indices of organ dysfunction or failure. The present system assesses pain intensity, emotional distress related to pain, and ADL deficits secondary to pain. ADL deficits are given the greatest weight. An individual’s pain-related impairment is considered unratable if (a) his or her behavior during the evaluation raises significant issues of credibility, (b) he or she has clinical findings atypical of a well-accepted medical condition, or (c) he or she is diagnosed with a condition that is vague or controversial.

A detailed protocol for assessing pain-related impairment is described below and outlined in Figure 18-1.

A. Evaluate the individual according to the body or organ rating system, and determine an impairment percentage. During the evaluation, the examiner should informally assess pain-related impairment.
B. If the body system impairment rating appears to adequately encompass the pain experienced by the individual due to his or her medical condition, his or her impairment rating is as indicated by the body system impairment rating.
C.
If the individual appears to have pain-related impairment that has increased the burden of his or her condition slightly, the examiner may increase the percentage found in A by up to 3%.
D. The examiner should perform a formal painrelated impairment assessment if any of the following conditions are met:
--break--
1) The individual appears to have pain-related impairment that is substantially in excess of the impairment determined in step A
or
--break--
2) The individual has a well-recognized medical condition that is characterized by pain in the absence of measurable dysfunction of an organ or body part (see Table 18-1 for examples)
or
-- chars 3009 --
--break--
3) The individual has a syndrome with the following characteristics: (a) it is associated with identifiable organ dysfunction that is ratable according to other chapters in the Guides; (b) it may be associated with a well-established pain syndrome, but the occurrence or nonoccurrence of the pain syndrome is not predictable; so that (c) the impairment ratings provided in step A do not capture the added burden of illness borne by the individual because of his or her associated pain syndrome (see Table 18-2 for examples).
E. If the examiner performs a formal pain-related impairment rating, he or she may increase the percentage found in step A by up to 3%, and he or she should classify the individual’s pain-related impairment into one of four categories: mild, moderate, moderately severe, or severe. In addition, the examiner should determine whether the pain-related impairment is ratable or unratable.

Table 18-3 Impairment Classification Due to Pain Disorders

Class 1 Mild
Pain severity, based on a combination of intensity and frequency, is mild
Individual’s pain is mildly aggravated by performing ADL; is able to perform them with few modifications
Individual demonstrates no or only minimal emotional distress in response to his or her pain
Individual is not receiving treatment for pain on a regular basis
Pain-related limitations during physical examination are mild and appear appropriate; few pain behaviors (overt expressions of pain, distress, and suffering, such as moaning, limping, moving in a guarded fashion, facial grimacing) are observed during examination

Class 2 Moderate
Pain severity, based on a combination of intensity and frequency, is moderate
Individual has moderate difficulty managing ADL; must make significant modifications in order to perform them (eg, move to a ground floor apartment, buy a car with automatic transmission)
Individual demonstrates mild to moderate affective distress in relation to his or her pain
Individual requires ongoing medical monitoring and is taking medication much of the time
Individual demonstrates significant pain-related limitations on physical examination; relatively few pain behaviors appear during the examination, and they are of indeterminate appropriateness

Class 3 Moderately Severe
Pain is present most of the time and may reach an intensity of
--break--
9-10/10
Individual can perform ADL only with substantial modifications; unable to perform many routine activities (eg, driving a car)
Individual demonstrates moderate to severe affective distress in relation to his or her pain
Individual receives medication to control pain on a maintenance basis
On physical examination, individual demonstrates severe painrelated limitations that may make the examination difficult to perform and results difficult to interpret
A number of pain behaviors are observed during the examination, and they appear to be congruent with organ dysfunction

Class 4 Severe
Pain is essentially continuous, with intensity reaching 9-10/10 at its worst
-- chars 3018 --
Individual must either get help from others for many ADL (eg, preparing food, dressing), modify them drastically (eg, stop bathing), or spend an inordinate amount of time accomplishing them (eg, 2 hours to get out of bed and dressed)
Individual demonstrates severe affective distress in relation to his or her pain and communicates the perception that the pain is completely out of control
Individual is receiving maximal pharmacologic support for his or her pain on an ongoing basis
Physical examination is virtually impossible to perform because individual is intolerant of many examination maneuvers (eg, refuses to ambulate or to allow examiner to palpate symptomatic area); a significant number of pain behaviors are observed during the examination, and they appear to be congruent with organ dysfunction

--break--
18.3e Classes of Pain-Related Impairment There are four general classes of impairment due to pain: class 1, mild; class 2, moderate; class 3, moderately severe; and class 4, severe (see Table 18-3).

--break--
18.3f How to Rate Pain-Related Impairment: Practical Steps
There are six steps in the pain-related impairment evaluation process, each discussed below. Several alternative methods are available to evaluate the severity of pain, activity restrictions, emotional distress, and pain behaviors, some of which are discussed subsequently. One such methodology is provided
in Table 18-4. The first three parts of the protocol included in Table 18-4 rely on the individual’s

self-report. The questions may be provided to the individual to complete on his or her own, or they can be presented in interview format. If the individual is asked to complete the questionnaire on his or her own, someone should be available to answer questions and to review the completed form to make sure the individual has responded to all the items. If the individual has a question about completion of any of the items in Sections I to III, he or she should be instructed to make the best estimate possible. Although Table 18-4 provides a numerical score, this should not be misunderstood to represent a quantitative impairment rating, but rather is used to classify individuals into the four qualitative classes. To that purpose, alternative methods may be used so long as they are valid and appropriately referred to in the report.

Table 18-4 Ratings Determining Impairment Associated With Pain

I. Pain (Self-report of Severity)
A. Rate how severe your pain is right now, at this moment
Most severe pain can imagine

B. Rate how severe your pain is at its worst (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
None
Excruciating

C. Rate how severe your pain is on the average
Excruciating

D. Rate how much your pain is aggravated by activity
--break--
7
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Activity does not
Excruciating following
aggravate pain
any activity

Sum score of Section I: A–D = Total pain severity/4 =

E. Rate how frequently you experience pain (circle a number):
-- chars 3006 --
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Rarely
All of the time

Add total pain severity score
(items A–D/4) to score for item E =
Total pain severity score (range from 0 to 20) =

II. Activity Limitation or Interference
A. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to walk 1 block? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Does not restrict
Pain makes it impossible
ability to walk
for me to walk

B. How much does your pain prevent you from lifting 10 pounds
--break--
7
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Does not prevent from
Impossible to lift lifting 10 pounds

--break--
10 pounds

C. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to sit for 1/2 hour? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Does not restrict ability
Impossible to sit to sit for 1/2 hour

for 1/2 hour
D.
How much does your pain interfere with your ability to stand for 1/2 hour? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Pain does not interfere
Unable to
with ability to stand at all
stand at all

E. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to get enough sleep? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Does not prevent me
Impossible
from sleeping
to sleep

F. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to
participate in social activities? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Does not interfere
Completely interferes
with social activities
with social activities

G. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to travel up to 1 hour by car? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Does not interfere with ability
Completely unable to to travel 1 hour by car

travel 1 hour by car

H. In general, how much does your pain interfere with your daily activities? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Does not interfere

Completely interferes with my daily activities
with my daily activities

I. How much do you limit your activities to prevent your pain from getting worse? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Does not limit
Completely limits activities

activities

J. How much does your pain interfere with your relationship with your family/partner/significant others? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Does not interfere
Completely interferes
with relationships
with relationships

K. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to do jobs around your home? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Does not interfere

Completely unable to do any job around home

L. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to shower or bathe without help from someone else? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Does not interfere
My pain makes it impossible to at all

shower or bathe without help

M. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to
--break--
7
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Does not interfere

My pain makes it at all
impossible to write or type

N. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to dress yourself? (circle a number):
-- chars 3078 --
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Does not interfere

My pain makes it at all
impossible to dress myself

O. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to
engage in sexual activities? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Does not interfere
My pain makes it almost
at all
impossible to engage in any sexual activity

P. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to
A-P = Total score for activity limitation/16 = Mean activity limitation =
III.
Individual’s Report of Effect of Pain on Mood
A. Rate your overall mood during the past week. (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Extremely high/good
Extremely low/bad

B. During the past week, how anxious or worried have you been because of your pain? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Not at all anxious/worried  Extremely anxious/worried

C. During the past week, how depressed have you been because of your pain? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Not at all depressed
Extremely depressed

D.
During the past week, how irritable have you been because of your pain? (circle a number):
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Not at all irritable
Extremely irritable

E. In general, how anxious/worried are you about performing activities because they might make your pain/symptoms worse?
--break--
8
--break--
9
--break--
10
Not at all anxious/worried  Extremely anxious/worried

Sum score of Section III:
A-E = Total pain impairment attributed to mood state/5 = Mean score =

Assess Whether the Individual Is at MMI This concept is particularly important in the assessment of pain-related impairment. A person should
not be judged medically stable, and therefore ratable, unless he or she has undergone a thorough evaluation for the entire range of factors that can affect pain
and has undergone a vigorous trial of rehabilitative treatment.

For example, there may be no further orthopedic interventions available for a lumbar pseudarthrosis. Spinal arachnoiditis may be refractory to any intervention. Yet in both cases, appropriate pain management may reduce all the components of impairment, with reduced pain severity, functional restoration, and mood normalization. Consultation with a specialist in pain medicine may be required to determine whether the impairment is fixed or potentially useful treatments are available.

Determine the Severity of the Pain
Although absolute quantification of pain is not possible, severity may be estimated using, for example, a visual analog scale, a numeric, or a box-rating scale. A horizontal or vertical line of known length is anchored by “no pain at all” at one end and “worst pain ever” at the other. A line of consecutive boxes also anchored with these end points, with a number in each one and in which the individual is asked to place an “X” in the box, may be of particular use because some people have difficulty understanding how to use a VAS scale.23 It is useful to obtain least, worst, and current levels, as well as the usual level. Exacerbating and mitigating factors should be sought. The character or quality of pain may assist with diagnosis and help establish that the pain is compatible with a known medical syndrome.
-- chars 3232 --

The McGill Pain Questionnaire is widely used in pain medicine. It contains lists of words chosen to reflect the sensory (eg, dull, cramping), affective (eg, agonizing, terrifying), and evaluative (eg, annoying, unbearable) components of the pain experience.24 There are also descriptors of the temporal qualities of the pain (momentary, steady, intermittent). Line drawings of the body permit the individual to shade in the location of the pain. Numeric descriptors of the overall present pain intensity are provided (1 = mild, 2 = discomforting, 3 = distressing, 4 = horrible, 5 = excruciating).

Determine Activity Restrictions
The reported severity of pain may not correlate well with its functional impact. Indeed, some individuals report well-preserved function despite pain of 9/10 in severity, while others portray a vegetative existence with a pain level of 4/10. It is essential to know the extent to which the following functions are impeded by pain: ADL, socialization, recreation, work, sleep, sexuality, and cognition.

A quasi-quantification of functional status can be derived by scoring the extent to which pain interferes with each (applicable) activity. The individual should be queried as to how often he or she leaves the home (with documentation if housebound), gets out only for medical appointments, and the like. “Down time,” the total number of hours a day the person is reclining, is a useful measure.

It is useful to provide quantification of functional limitations via accepted, standardized instruments that permit interrater comparisons. The Pain Disability Index provides 0 to 10 scales on which individuals rate pain-related interference in seven domains, including family/home responsibilities, recreation, social activity, occupation, sexual behavior, self-care, and life support activities (eating, sleeping, breathing).25 The SF-36 is widely used to determine the degree of functional impairment and changes in overall wellness following treatment of those with pain as well as of other populations.26 The Oswestry27 and Roland-Morris28 are brief questionnaires that provide an economical office assessment of function in individuals with back pain. A large number of other instruments exist, as reported in the literature. It is also possible to correlate estimates of function to actual impairment using questionnaires and scales.

The ADL listed in Table 1-2 are commonly classified within one of eight different areas: physical activity, nonspecialized hand activities, sleep, travel, self-care and personal hygiene, sexual function, communication, and sensory function.29 The first six of these are most relevant for impairment due to pain, as it is extremely rare for pain to create major restrictions in communication and sensory functioning. A number of measures have been developed to assess ADL, some of which are general and others of which are designed for use with specific diseases and injuries.30,31 Physicians may choose to select from among the available ADL scales if they wish a more detailed assessment. Although individuals may have difficulty separating the effect of specific diseases or injuries from the pain on their activities, some estimate is necessary to help in determining the extent of impairment due to pain that exceeds activity restriction due to the disease or injury. For example, an individual with a below-the-knee amputation may have some activity limitations in ambulation; he or she may have additional limitations due to severe stump pain.
-- chars 3522 --

Several well-established general measures have been standardized on chronic pain sufferers and have been used in numerous published studies that may be of particular use as they assess several important domains relevant to the assessment of impairment.
For example, the Sickness Impact Profile (SIP) is a widely used health status measure that has been shown to reliably assess the impact of health problems on function and quality of life.32 The West Haven–Yale Multidimensional Pain Inventory (MPI)33 is another reliable and valid health status measure that has been used extensively.

Determine the Presence of Emotional Distress
An important component of chronic pain-related impairment is its associated affective distress, which often includes sadness, anger or irritability, and anxiety.34 In some cohorts, the depression seems to be primarily a function of life interference and cognitive changes, while in others it seems to be primarily a function of the pain itself.35 In either case, it is unnecessary that an individual meet diagnostic criteria for a mood, anxiety, or other psychiatric disorder for there to be substantial suffering related to such issues as pain, loss of meaningful and pleasurable life activities, and a bleak future.

It may be appropriate to use rating scales to provide some quantification of affective changes. Brief selfadministered screens for depression, such as the Beck Depression Inventory,36 the Zung Depression Index,37 and rater-administered screens such as the Hamilton Self-rating Scale for Depression,38 may alert the physician to the presence of a mood disorder that requires treatment, as well as to the possibility of suicide. Similar instruments are available for anxiety and include the Beck Anxiety Scale and Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety. The Profile of Mood States (POMS),39 which has also been useful in providing quantification of various mood states in individuals with chronic pain, has scales reflecting impaired concentration, anxiety, depression, fatigue, and others.

As with pain reports, these instruments all are subject to minimization or exaggeration on the part of the individual. People are seen who score four times the cutoff for depression on the Beck Depression Inventory, yet who are animated and playful in the gym. When such discrepancies occur, the weighting given the instrument should be minimal. Moreover, caution must be taken in interpreting responses on these measures, as they were not standardized on samples of individuals with medical disorders, and using the usual cutoff scores may lead to an excessively large number of false positives.

It is important to obtain information from the individual regarding the impact of pain on his or her mood state. As noted in the discussion of activity restrictions, it may be difficult for the individual to separate the effect of specific diseases or injuries from the pain on activities; however, the items are designed to obtain a rough estimate of the individual’s beliefs.
-- chars 3014 --

Determine if Pain Behaviors Are Present Pain behaviors are the ways that individuals communicate about their pain. These behaviors may be verbal or nonverbal. The individual may be unaware of them, as they may be emitted and maintained due to responses that have been received from significant others, including health care professionals. In other
instances, individuals may exaggerate their behaviors to signal pain and distress with the intent to achieve some desired response from those who observe the behaviors. Thus, both the antecedents and consequences of the behaviors are important.

Some individuals appear stoic as they go through evaluations, and the pain behaviors they do demonstrate are concordant with other medical information regarding their condition. In this instance, the pain behaviors provide valuable clues regarding a person’s diagnosis and tend to validate the fact that he or she is suffering because of the diagnosed condition. For example, consider an individual with suspected degenerative joint disease of the hip who walks with a characteristic limp. The limp provides a clue to the diagnosis and tends to support the individual’s reports that he or she has significant pain when walking.

At the opposite extreme, an individual may demonstrate pain behaviors that appear exaggerated and discordant with his or her presumed medical condition. These pain behaviors may appear to be driven by a variety of factors, such as overwhelming somatic anxiety or the person’s desire to convince an examiner that he or she is suffering greatly. The common denominator underlying them is that they do not appear to be direct, inevitable consequences of a definable medical condition. Exaggerated, discordant pain behaviors tend to cast doubt on the validity of the information that people provide regarding their condition.

Thus, an examiner has a twofold task regarding pain behaviors demonstrated by a person undergoing an impairment rating: to identify the pain behaviors, and to interpret their significance, that is, to decide whether they tend to authenticate the validity of the individual’s suffering or to raise questions about his or her communication style.

It is hard to specify a generic list of pain behaviors. The behaviors to look for depend on the individual’s medical condition, examination maneuvers that are performed, previous responses obtained, and intent. Physicians probably differ significantly in what they view as exaggerated pain behaviors. Sources of variation include different concepts of what represents “legitimate disease” and thresholds for calling a behavior abnormal.

Despite the limitations noted, pain behaviors provide useful information regarding both the impact of pain on observable behavior and the individual’s style of communicating (eg, demonstrative, stoic) about their pain. The physician should observe the individual’s pain behaviors as he or she enters the examination room, during the interview, and during the history taking. This will eliminate the increase in pain behaviors that might be directly associated with the physical examination.
-- chars 3122 --

The examiner should give a score between +10 and
–10 to indicate his or her global evaluation of an individual’s pain behavior during the interview and physical examination. A positive score is given when the individual demonstrates pain behaviors that are concordant with the overall clinical findings and, in the opinion of the examiner, tend to authenticate his or her suffering. A negative score is given when an individual demonstrates grossly “nonorganic” or “exaggerated” pain behaviors. A score close to 0 should be given when the examiner is uncertain about how to interpret the individual’s pain behaviors.

The specific behaviors an examiner considers vary according to the individual’s medical condition and the examination maneuvers performed. Potentially significant behaviors that commonly occur during evaluations are listed in Table 18-5. Note that the significance of pain behavior cannot be determined unless related to a particular individual and context. Thus, a pain behavior that would be considered concordant in one clinical context would be considered discordant in a different one. Also, note that pain behaviors that tend to validate an individual’s pain are generally specific to that person’s medical condition. In contrast, exaggerated pain behaviors—such as emotional displays and pain-limited weakness— tend to occur in conjunction with a wide variety of medical conditions.

The physician can record the pain behaviors observed using the behaviors listed in Table 18-5.40 These behaviors may be viewed as indicating symptom magnification, especially when several are present and they grossly exceed what might be expected from individuals with a similar diagnosis. These systematic observations should be used as the basis for determining a global rating regarding the presence and congruence of pain behaviors given the individual’s diagnosis and organ dysfunction.

Credibility of the Individual
Physicians routinely assess the credibility of individuals in the course of their clinical work. This kind of assessment is particularly important in the context of rating pain-related impairment because the ratings depend on verbal and nonverbal behaviors of people that are at least partly under voluntary control.
Although there are no definite rules for assessing credibility, Section 18.4, Behavioral Confounders, discusses several issues that a physician should consider when making a judgment about a person’s credibility.

The key question the examiner should ask is, Do the limitations that an individual describes and demonstrates accurately reflect the burden of illness he or she bears during everyday activity?

--break--
18.4 Behavioral Confounders
An extensive literature demonstrates what common sense suggests: pain behaviors and perception of pain are strongly influenced by beliefs, expectations, rewards, attention, and training. In the absence of a direct measure of pain, such behaviors function as markers by which pain is judged. However, voluminous literature demonstrates that these markers reflect social and environmental factors as much as they reflect pain. It has been shown, for example, that individual ratings of pain severity diminish when “well talk” is reinforced. With repeated identical pain stimuli, intensity reports vary with feedback. Verbal reinforcement increases performance in individuals with back pain. Studies consistently show that spouse solicitousness is correlated with pain behavior.41
-- chars 3474 --

Prospective studies consistently show that onset of disabling pain is highly associated with such factors as job dissatisfaction, lack of support at work, stress, and perceived inadequacy of income.42-45 Once initiated, the progression of pain to chronicity is contingent on similar factors.46,47 Financial compensation, receipt of work-related sickness payments, and compensation-related litigation are also associated with chronicity, as are such social and economic factors as poor education, language problems, and low income. Chronicity is also favored by individual tendencies to be preoccupied with one’s body and symptoms.48,49 Even in individuals with clear-cut radicular pain from disk prolapse/protrusion, application for retirement at 6 months was best predicted by depression and daily hassles at work.50,51 In the case of injured workers, performance on functional capacity evaluation is reduced if the worker is informed that the test results will be used to determine work classification.52 Industrial injuries and compensation situations appear to provide a disproportionate number of individuals with such issues.53,54

Although the suffering induced by a miserable vocational situation may equal or exceed that from disease or injury, it is the intent of the Guides to assign impairment based on disease and injury, not on such environmental situations as an individual’s fear of returning to a hostile work environment. Similarly, the physician charged with assigning an impairment rating expects to discharge the obligation by assessing the state of the person as an organism, and he or she rightly considers such external factors as the state of the economy, the market for particular skills, and the local tolerance for language barriers to be distracters that lower the “signal-to-noise” ratio in the assessment.

Thus, examiners face a dilemma. They know that a variety of nonbiological factors strongly influence the disability status and ADL deficits of individuals they rate, but they are charged with the task of rating impairment on the basis of measurable dysfunctions of organ or body parts.

--break--
18.4a Assessing Behavioral Reliability
A primary step in radiographic interpretation is evaluation of the quality of the image. Incorrect exposure, motion artifact, and other technical deficiencies may weaken the conclusions that may be drawn from the image. The principal gauge of pain is its associated behaviors, which include reports. Thus, it is critical that this measure of pain be assessed for reliability. Inappropriate pain behavior, embellishment, and symptom magnification are common, particularly in medicolegal circumstances and entitlement programs. The following is a guide to their assessment.

Congruence With Established Conditions In cases of phantom pain, the individual describes pain in an absent extremity. While this might be expected to evoke incredulity, it does not because this condition has been well described for decades, long before its pathophysiology was understood.
-- chars 3038 --
Similarly, the person with complex regional pain syndrome (previously called reflex sympathetic dystrophy, or RSD) may describe exquisite pain on light touch of a healthy-appearing extremity following a trivial injury. A constellation of associated signs and symptoms, such as cold sensitivity, autonomic changes, trophic changes, dystonic phenomena, and others help to confirm that the pain complaint is consistent with a known clinical syndrome. Intolerance of light touch over a region of the lower back in individuals with mechanical low back pain is inconsistent with a defined disease process and thus fails to meet this criterion.

Most known conditions have such expected concomitants. Typically, an individual would not watch television or read while waiting for a migraine to abate, and there would be an expected response to ergots, triptans, or other antimigraine preparations. An individual with neuropathic pain will likely, but not always, show some response to certain antiepileptic drugs (eg, gabapentin, carbamazepine) or antidepressants (eg, tricyclics). A person with persistent pain of pancreatitis would be unlikely to gain weight.

Consistency Over Time and Situation
There is risk in placing unwarranted confidence in the validity of assessments that are numeric and therefore often considered “objective” and “scientific.” Such confidence is challenged by such observations as a person who can tolerate only 10° forward flexion while standing, yet can sit with legs outstretched and touch his or her toes. Similarly, a person may demonstrate collapsing with pain on manual testing of plantar flexion, yet be able to tiptoe. Others may limp on one leg walking forward, the other walking backward, but neither on a treadmill. Grip strength may
be measured repeatedly and coefficients of variation calculated, although these methods have been criticized.55 Rapid exchange grip strength testing may provide similar information.56 Isokinetic strength testing may discriminate between maximal and submaximal effort.57 Complaints and dysfunction should be relatively independent of the observers present and should generally persist, despite distraction.

Consistency With Anatomy and Physiology Waddell’s signs are perhaps the best known of numerous indicators of pain behaviors that are more likely to be accounted for by an individual’s expectations than by organic pathology.58,59 One example is that of axial rotation, in which the standing individual’s hips are rotated in each direction by the examiner. This essentially affects only the hips and ankles, leaving the pelvis and all above it to move as a unit. Exacerbation of back pain by this maneuver is considered abnormal. It is important, however, when using this method not to rate the individual on only one abnormal test and to place the response in the context of the individual’s history and physical examination.

Observer Agreement
Collateral information from relatives and other evaluating professionals is of critical value in determining the consistency of individual behaviors, which helps to confirm that their relationship is to perceived pain and varies little with changes in observers.
-- chars 3182 --

Other Inappropriate Illness Behavior
It may be difficult to judge whether or not behavior is compatible with perceived pain. For example, because one cannot know how much leg pain an individual experiences on walking, it is hard to know
whether an antalgic gait is exaggerated. Inappropriate illness behavior may be suspected, however, if an individual demonstrates dysfunction in unrelated domains. For example, except in extreme situations, an individual with back pain should not require that the spouse complete the individual’s questionnaire— or his or her sentences. Chronic pain rarely precludes making one’s own phone calls to the doctor, paying bills, etc. When a person has delegated these functions to others, abnormal illness behavior is likely.

--break--
18.4b Incorporating Behavioral Confounders Into Impairment Ratings Physicians should consider the confounders described in Section 18.4a when they evaluate the pain behaviors of individuals (see Determine if Pain Behaviors Are Present, Section 18.3f) and when they rate the credibility of individuals (see Credibility of the Individual, Section 18.3f).

--break--
18.4c Cautions
Although no one would conclude that because an
x-ray is of poor quality there is unlikely to be pathology of concern, this non sequitur frequently occurs in cases of aberrant pain behaviors. Such behaviors should properly cause physicians to be uncertain, but not dismissive. Behavior is affected by many factors. The appearance of symptom exaggeration can be created by fear or by having learned that certain actions or positions provoke pain. “Nonphysiologic” signs may occur in dementia. Excessive or exaggerated pain behaviors can be a response to feeling discounted or mistrusted, so that one must emphasize symptoms to persuade physicians of their reality.
Anyone might dramatize a problem in an effort to have it taken seriously. Thus, symptom magnification can be an iatrogenic phenomenon that occurs when an individual feels mistrusted or poorly cared for.
--break--
18.5
How to Rate
Pain-Related Impairment: A Sample Protocol
As the preceding discussion indicates, a physician must rely on a wide range of clinical skills when he or she assesses pain-related impairment. Also, the discussion indicates that several different assessment instruments may be used in the course of the assessments. The plethora of assessment methods available can further complicate the already difficult task facing the examining physician.

The protocol described below selects assessment instruments and procedures that, in the opinion of the authors, permit physicians to reach conclusions about pain-related impairment that are reliable and valid.
The specific steps in the protocol are as follows:

--break--
1. Determine whether the individual is medically stable.
--break--
2. Follow the steps outlined in Figure 18-1.
--break--
3. If a formal assessment of pain-related impairment is to be performed:
a. Have the individual complete the questionnaire shown in Table 18-4.
-- chars 3019 --
(1) This provides information about three domains that are relevant to pain-related impairment: severity of pain, ADL restrictions, and emotional distress.
(2) Follow the instructions given in Table 18-6 to obtain the person’s score for each of these three domains.
b. Observe the individual’s pain behaviors throughout the evaluation. Follow the instructions given in Table 18-5 to obtain the individual’s score for the pain behaviors domain.
c. Make a global assessment of the person’s credibility, taking into consideration the factors discussed in the Section 18.4. Assign a score between –10 and +10, where –10 indicates very low credibility and +10 indicates very high credibility. Enter this score in line 5 of Table
--break--
18-6. If the credibility score is less than 0, the examiner should consider the possibility of aborting the pain-related impairment assessment on the grounds that the individual does not meet the entry criteria given in Section 18.3b.

d. Follow the instructions given in Table 18-6 to combine scores from each of the above five domains (severity of pain, ADL restrictions, emotional distress, pain behaviors, and credibility) into a total pain-related impairment score. These scores are not impairment ratings but are used only to classify the individual as discussed under c.
e. Follow the instructions given in Table 18-7 to convert this total pain-related impairment score into one of the four categories of impairment described in Table 18-3 (ie, mild, moderate, moderately severe, or severe).
--break--
4. Review the material provided in Sections 18.3a and 18.3b to determine whether the pain-related impairment is ratable or unratable.
--break--
5. The final impairment rating should include the following:
a. The percentage impairment rating based on the dysfunction in the organ or body part being rated (see step A in Section 18.3d).
b. Additional impairment of up to 3% may be given if an individual has pain-related impairment that increases the burden of illness slightly (see step C in Section 18.3d).
c. If the individual has undergone a formal painrelated assessment:
(1) An indication of the individual’s painrelated impairment category (see 3e above).
(2) An indication of whether this impairment is ratable or unratable.
(a) If pain-related impairment is ratable, an indication of whether or not the painrelated impairment is adequately encapsulated by the impairment rating given for organ or body part dysfunction (see Section 18.3a).

--break--
18.6  Psychogenic Pain
Somatoform disorders are a group of conditions characterized by physical symptoms that are not fully explained by a medical condition, the effects of a substance, or another mental disorder.60 The symptoms are not under voluntary control. Pain disorder is diagnosed when pain is a predominant focus of the presentation and causes significant distress or impairment in important areas of functioning.
Psychological factors are judged to play a significant role in the onset, severity, exacerbation, or maintenance of the pain. Pain disorder associated with psychological factors is diagnosed when psychological factors are judged to have the major role; in this subtype, general medical conditions play little or no role. Pain disorder associated with both psychological factors and a general medical condition is indicated when both psychological factors and a general medical condition are judged to have important roles in the onset, severity, exacerbation, or maintenance of the pain. The diagnoses are rather general, and almost any person with persistent pain would meet the inclusion criteria.
-- chars 3624 --

These current diagnostic terms appear to refer to conditions previously called conversion, hysteria, and psychogenic pain. There appears to be no fully satisfactory explanation or conceptualization of these conditions. Since pain is a perceptual experience, one could argue that all pain is a psychic phenomenon. Thus, psychogenic pain would be a tautology, much like psychogenic joy. Certainly, those processes in the dorsal horn, spinothalamic tract, and thalamus of an anesthetized person are not considered pain, a term reserved for what occurs when these processes access conscious awareness in an aversive fashion.

The concept of psychogenic pain is further complicated by the fact that a variety of conditions formerly considered psychogenic have been found to be neurologically based and that its diagnostic signs have been challenged.61 Nevertheless, psychogenic pain appears to exist and probably represents several different phenomena. Unlike psychogenic pain, other psychogenic symptoms can be confirmed; for example, conversion blindness preserves the opticokinetic reflex, psychogenic seizures occur during a normal EEG recording, conversion anesthesia does not diminish the sensory evoked potential, and psychogenically paralyzed extremities move during sleep. Such confirmation is unavailable in the case of pain.

Some individuals are seen whose symptoms resemble no organic condition, who have inconsistent and nonphysiologic physical findings, yet who demonstrate great distress with agitation or psychomotor retardation, inability to sleep, and a general misery that is consistent across environments and confirmed by others. Such individuals’ suffering is genuine, should not be minimized, and constitutes a risk for suicide. It is most probable that these individuals truly perceive pain, suffer with it, and are impaired.

Chapter 14, which deals with impairment associated with mental disorders, describes a system for assessing impairment among individuals with pain disorders. Examiners will sometimes be uncertain about whether to use the assessment procedures described in this chapter or the ones described in Chapter 14. They should ask the following key question when evaluating an individual whose chronic pain is not fully explained on the basis of organ pathology: Does it appear that psychological factors played a major role in the initiation of the pain syndrome or are playing a major role in its continuation? If the answer to this question is yes, the examiner should use the rating methods described in Chapter 14. If the answer is no, or if the examiner is uncertain, he or she should use the rating methods described in this chapter.

--break--
18.7  Malingering
Malingering is conscious deception for the purpose of gain. While most authorities declare that malingering is quite uncommon, there appear to be few data regarding its frequency. Fishbain et al reviewed literature suggesting that malingering is present in 1.25% to 10.4% of individuals with chronic pain; however, they found serious flaws with the methodology and concluded that no conclusions could be drawn from the data.62
-- chars 3135 --

Other fields provide some limits regarding the prevalence of malingering. In individuals with unexplained intractable diarrhea, 14% had positive stool examinations for laxatives, although all had denied use of laxatives.63 Among 333 people who claimed compensation for noise-induced hearing loss, the incidence of exaggeration on hearing tests (as determined by cortical evoked response audiometry) was 17.7%.64 Weintraub cites studies showing that 20% to 46% of people consider purposeful misrepresentation of compensation claims to be acceptable behavior.65

These studies suggest that factitious illness and malingering may not be rare, but they do not provide information as to how often these conditions simulate pain. They do suggest that evaluators keep an open mind as to the possibility of these phenomena, which are probably less likely in those seeking treatment than in those seeking compensation.

Confirmation of malingering is extremely difficult and generally depends on intentional or inadvertent surveillance. Anecdotes abound of providers running into wheelchair-bound individuals strolling about a mall or encountering an individual in the parking lot holding a cane in the air and demonstrating a normal gait. By definition, malingering is not a disease but a volitional deception. It thus requires no treatment.

--break--
18.9 Case Examples

--break--
18.8  Conclusion
The assessment of pain-related impairment constitutes a substantial challenge, as it is the most common reason for disability, the most subjective, and perhaps the most multifaceted. Equitable quantification of impairment requires attention to subjective experiences of pain and emotional distress, as well as reports of behavioral impairment, all of which can only be confirmed indirectly. At times, it seems to present the dilemma of being too difficult to perform and too essential to omit.

Despite these obstacles, it appears that each of the components of pain can, in most cases, be assessed with good reliability if a meticulous evaluation is performed that includes observation and collateral information. In this way, the interests of individuals who hope to achieve validation of their symptoms and payers who hope to avoid indiscriminate financial obligations can be fairly addressed.

================================================================================
Manual End Chapter 18 (last Chapter)

Appendix

Recording Range-of-Motion Measurements

Range-of-motion (ROM) measurements are used in the spine, upper extremities, and lower extremities to identify dysfunction in movement that may result in changes in function in the body part. Physicians have questioned the reproducibility of ROM measurements, as well as their ability to predict aspects of function.1 Reproducibility may be improved with the use of standardized measurement techniques, proper equipment, trained evaluators, adequate designated warm-up exercises, and uniform recording.1,2 The purpose of this appendix is to provide further information on factors that can affect reproducibility to lead to greater standardization in technique.
-- chars 3121 --

Measurement Devices
The Guides refers to the use of goniometers or inclinomers to measure joint motion. Except in the spine, in which the inclinometer is the device of choice, either the inclinometer or the goniometer can be used to reliably measure joint motion, depending on the preference and experience of the examiner. A twoarm goniometer depends on visual assessment of both the stationary and the moving arm. An inclinometer measures gravity and enables the starting position to be consistently recorded with respect to gravity. Some researchers and clinicians believe the inclinometer is easier to use and more accurate, although limited data exist supporting this opinion.3 Other electronic devices may also yield accurate measurements. Limited data exist concerning how measurements from newer devices compare to the more commonly used goniometers and inclinometers. Before using another measurement device, the evaluator should assess its reproducibility and accuracy compared to established tools and methods.

Measurement Techniques
To increase accuracy, identify anatomic landmarks, properly position and stabilize the body, and use a consistent technique as outlined in the Guides to apply the measuring device to the joint. Anatomic landmarks are listed in the Guides. It is recommended that the evaluator mark these areas with tape or a marking pencil to ensure the same starting position for repeated measurements. The evaluator should also record the landmarks used in the impairment report; differences in the site of the landmark could result in different findings among examiners.

Prior to obtaining measurements, have the individual perform appropriate warm-up exercises to obtain an accurate assessment of current ability. Include repetitions of extension, flexion, lateral bending, and rotation as listed in the relevant chapters.

Properly position and stabilize the area, taking into account the individual’s impairment, level of comfort, and known biomechanical characteristics of the joint.1 Most optimal positions for measurement are noted in the Guides. Obtain proper body alignment and stabilization of the device before recording measurements. Active movements are recommended since they may be more consistent than passive movements, less of a risk to individual injury, and a better approximation of the individual’s function.
Figure A-1a Neutral (0°) Starting Positions for ROM Measurements—Frontal Plane
Differences in recording systems for ROM measurements can contribute to additional errors in interpretation. Ideally, the examiner records the starting point and measurements in reference to the starting point. Subsequent motions are recorded in a reproducible and succinct manner.

ROM measurements can be recorded with text descriptions or with the use of a numeric format. A numeric format has been adopted by some states and a few countries in Europe to facilitate an efficient and uniform way of recording and retrieving data.
This numeric format is known as the SFTR method of recording joint motion. The SFTR method allows recording of motion with only one letter and a maximum of three numbers. This numeric format is brief and complete, minimizes errors in transcription or understanding, and facilitates communication with the universal language of numbers. The SFTR format also enables easy translation of data from reports to computerized formats and displays.
-- chars 3416 --

Several requirements need to be met to use and record measurements according to the SFTR method.

1. All joint measurements are measured from a defined, neutral 0° starting position, as shown in Figure A-1a. This neutral starting position is the generally accepted anatomic position, with the body upright and the upper extremities extended at the side of the body with palms facing anteriorly. If the individual is sitting, supine, or prone, the starting position relates to the upright anatomic position. The starting position for rotation is midway between external and internal rotation or supination and pronation.
2. All joint motion is recorded in three basic planes: sagittal (S), frontal (F), and transverse (T). Rotation (R) crosses multiple planes and receives a separate recording. The planes are depicted in Figure 15-7.
a. The sagittal (S) plane divides the body into right and left halves. (S) motions include extension and flexion.

b. The frontal (F) plane divides the body into anterior and posterior parts (front and back).
(F) motions include abduction, adduction, elevation, depression, radial and ulnar deviation, and lateral bending of the spine to the left
and right.
c. The transverse (T) plane divides the body into upper and lower halves. (T) motions include horizontal shoulder extension and flexion, hip horizontal abduction and adduction (hip flexed at 90°), shoulder retraction and protraction, and hallux valgus.
d. Rotation (R) can occur in any of the planes, depending on the limb positions. (R) motions include external and internal rotation, supination and pronation, and spine rotation to the left and right.
3. Record all motions with three numbers in a specific sequence. Record movements to the left or away from the middle of the body first: extension, abduction, external rotation, supination, valgus, eversion, lateral bending, or rotation of the spine to the left. Then record the reference (starting) position, which is normally 0°, in the middle. Record movements toward the middle of the body after the reference 0° (on the right side of 0°): flexion, adduction, internal rotation, pronation, varus, inversion, lateral bending, or rotation of the spine to the right.
4.
Record all positions of ankylosis with two numbers, indicating the degree of ankylosis and the reference or starting position of 0°. For example, wrist ankylosis in 20° of extension is recorded as: wrist (S): 20-0 and in 20° of flexion as wrist (S) 0-20.
5. When the neutral 0° position cannot be reached due to limited or restricted motion, the middle number will not be 0 but will be the actual starting position. For example, an elbow flexed at 30° (extension lag of 30°), with further flexion to 90°, is recorded as S: 0-30-90.

Tables A-1, A-2, and A-3 describe a method to record ROM measurements for the upper extremties, lower extremities, and spine, using a standard text description and a numeric recording system, the SFTR method.
† A non-0° starting position is noted in the ankylosis table.
-- chars 3022 --
