

================================================================================
Chapter 1: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides
1.1 History
1.2 Impairment, Disability, and Handicap
1.3 The Organ System and Whole Body Approach to Impairment
1.4 Philosophy and Use of the Combined Values Chart
1.5 Incorporating Science with Clinical Judgment
1.6 Causation, Apportionment Analysis, and Aggravation
1.7 Use of the Guides
1.8 Impairment Evaluations in Workers’ Compensation
1.9 Employability Determinations
1.10 Railroad and Maritime Workers
1.11 The Physician’s Role Based on the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
1.12 Summary
1.1
History
The Guides was first published in book form in 1971 in response to a public need for a standardized, objective approach to evaluating medical impair- ments. Sections of the first edition of the Guides were originally published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, beginning in 1958 and continuing until August 1970.1 Since then, the Guides has undergone four revisions, culminating in the current, fifth edition. The purpose of this fifth edition of the Guides is to update the diagnostic cri- teria and evaluation process used in impairment assessment, incorporating available scientific evi- dence and prevailing medical opinion. Chapter authors were encouraged to use the latest scientific evidence from their specialty and, where evidence was lacking, develop a consensus view. This chapter was revised from the earlier edition in response to specific requests from user groups concerning the definitions, appropriate use, and scope of application of the Guides.
1
2 Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
The fifth edition includes most of the common con- ditions, excluding unusual cases that require individ- ual consideration. Since this edition encompasses the most current criteria and procedures for impairment assessment, it is strongly recommended that physi- cians use this latest edition, the fifth edition, when rating impairment.
1.2 Impairment, Disability, and
Handicap
1.2a Impairment
The Guides continues to define impairment as
“a loss, loss of use, or derangement of any body part, organ system, or organ function.” 2 This defi- nition of impairment is retained in this edition. A medical impairment can develop from an illness or injury. An impairment is considered permanent when it has reached maximal medical improvement (MMI), meaning it is well stabilized and unlikely to change substantially in the next year with or without medical treatment. The term impairment in the Guides refers to permanent impairment, which is the focus of the Guides.
An impairment can be manifested objectively, for example, by a fracture, and/or subjectively, through fatigue and pain.3 Although the Guides emphasizes objective assessment, subjective symptoms are included within the diagnostic criteria. According to the Guides, determining whether an injury or illness results in a permanent impairment requires a medical assessment performed by a physician. An impair- ment may lead to functional limitations or the inabil- ity to perform activities of daily living.
Table 1-1, adapted from a report by the AMA Council on Scientific Affairs, lists various definitions of impairment and disability used by four main authorities: the AMA Guides, the World Health Organization, the Social Security Administration, and a state workers’ compensation statute.4 Although a nationally accepted definition for impairment does not exist, the general concept of impairment is simi- lar in the definitions of most organizations. Several terms used in the AMA definition, and their applica- tion throughout the Guides, will be discussed in this chapter and Chapter 2.
Loss, loss of use, or derangement implies a change from a normal or “preexisting” state. Normal is a range or zone representing healthy functioning and varies with age, gender, and other factors such as environmental conditions. For example, normal heart rate varies between a child and adult and according to whether the person is at rest or exercising.
Multiple factors need to be considered when assess- ing whether a specific or overall function is normal. A normal value can be defined from an individual or population perspective.
When evaluating an individual, a physician has two options: consider the individual’s healthy preinjury or preillness state or the condition of the unaffected side as “normal” for the individual if this is known, or compare that individual to a normal value defined by population averages of healthy people. The Guides uses both approaches. Accepted population values for conditions such as extremity range-of- motion or lung function are listed in the Guides; it is recommended that the physician use those values as detailed in the Guides when applicable. In other cir- cumstances, for instance, where population values are not available, the physician should use clinical judgment regarding normal structure and function and estimate what is normal for the individual based on the physician’s knowledge or estimate of the indi- vidual’s preinjury or preillness condition.
4	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
Data from healthy populations, when available and widely referenced, are incorporated into chapters of the Guides. In some organ or body systems, such as respiratory, certain measurements of lung function have been standardized for age and gender. In other body systems, such as the musculoskeletal, age and gender differences are not reflected in most of the values. While there may be age and gender differ- ences anticipated for some musculoskeletal values, such as range of motion in the spine and extremities, this edition of the Guides mainly reflects average range of motion from healthy populations of mixed age and gender. The normal values presented in the musculoskeletal section are based on a review of studies measuring range of motion, as cited in the text. Evaluating physicians may use their clinical judgment, however, and comment on any significant age or gender effect for a particular individual. For instance, the “normal” preinjury range of motion for a gymnast with hypermobility may exceed the listed normal values.
If an individual had previous measurements of func- tion that were below or above average population values, the physician may discuss that prior value and any subsequent loss for the individual, as well as compare it to the population normal. For example, a highly functioning athlete with documented, above- normal lung function, who has sustained an injury and now has decreased lung function that is nonethe- less similar to population averages, has experienced a loss in his or her lung function and has sustained an impairment. Based only on a population comparison, the athlete would be given a 0% impairment rating. However, it would be more appropriate in this instance for the physician to assign an impairment rating based on the degree of change from the ath- lete’s preinjury to postinjury state.
In evaluating impairment, the Guides considers both anatomic and functional loss. Some chapters place a greater emphasis on either anatomic or functional loss, depending upon common practice in that spe- cialty. Anatomic loss refers to damage to the organ system or body structure, while functional loss refers to a change in function for the organ or body system. An example of an anatomic deviation is development of heart enlargement; functional loss includes a loss in ejection fraction or the ability of the heart to pump adequately. Anatomic loss receives greater emphasis in the musculoskeletal system, as in measurements such as range of motion. Functional considerations receive greater emphasis in the mental and behav- ioral section.
The impairment criteria outlined in the Guides pro- vide a standardized method for physicians to use to determine medical impairment. The impairment cri- teria include diagnostic criteria, incorporating anatomic and functional measures. The impairment criteria were developed from scientific evidence as cited and from consensus of chapter authors or of medical specialty societies.
Impairment percentages or ratings developed by medical specialists are consensus-derived estimates that reflect the severity of the medical condition and the degree to which the impairment decreases an individual’s ability to perform common activities of daily living (ADL), excluding work. Impairment rat- ings were designed to reflect functional limitations and not disability. The whole person impairment percentages listed in the Guides estimate the impact of the impairment on the individual’s overall ability to perform activities of daily living, excluding work, as listed in Table 1-2.
The medical judgment used to determine the original impairment percentages could not account for the diversity or complexity of work but could account for daily activities common to most people. Work is not included in the clinical judgment for impairment percentages for several reasons: (1) work involves many simple and complex activities; (2) work is highly individualized, making generalizations inac- curate; (3) impairment percentages are unchanged for stable conditions, but work and occupations change; and (4) impairments interact with such other factors as the worker’s age, education, and prior work experience to determine the extent of work dis- ability. For example, an individual who receives a 30% whole person impairment due to pericardial heart disease is considered from a clinical standpoint to have a 30% reduction in general functioning as represented by a decrease in the ability to perform activities of daily living. For individuals who work in sedentary jobs, there may be no decline in their work ability although their overall functioning is decreased. Thus, a 30% impairment rating does not correspond to a 30% reduction in work capability.
Similarly, a manual laborer with this 30% impair- ment rating due to pericardial disease may be com- pletely unable to do his or her regular job and, thus, may have a 100% work disability.
As a result, impairment ratings are not intended for use as direct determinants of work disability. When a physician is asked to evaluate work-related disability, it is appropriate for a physician knowledgeable about the work activities of the patient to discuss the spe- cific activities the worker can and cannot do, given the permanent impairment.
Most impairment percentages in this fifth edition have been retained from the fourth edition because there are limited scientific data to support specific changes. It is recognized that there are limited data to support some of the previous impairment percent- ages as well. However, these ratings are currently accepted and should not be changed arbitrarily. In this edition, some percentages have been changed for greater scientific accuracy or to achieve consistency throughout the book.
A 0% whole person (WP) impairment rating is assigned to an individual with an impairment if the impairment has no significant organ or body system functional consequences and does not limit the per- formance of the common activities of daily living
indicated in Table 1-2. A 90% to 100% WP impair- ment indicates a very severe organ or body system impairment requiring the individual to be fully dependent on others for self-care, approaching death.
The activities of daily living, as originally developed for the Guides in the first and second editions,1,6 sig- nify common activities currently represented in scales of Activities of Daily Living and Instrumental Activities of Daily Living.7 The Guides refers to common ADLs, as listed in Table 1-2. The ADLs listed in this table correspond to the activities that physicians should consider when establishing a per- manent impairment rating. A physician can often assess a person’s ability to perform ADLs based on knowledge of the patient’s medical condition and clinical judgment. When the physician is estimating a permanent impairment rating, Table 1-2 can help to determine how significantly the impairment impacts these activities. Using the impairment criteria within a class and knowing the activities the individual can perform, the physician can estimate where the indi- vidual stands within that class.
There are many scales that measure ability to perform ADLs with greater degrees of accuracy. Many of these scales are concerned with more severe levels of disability, relevant to institutionalized patients and the elderly.7 During the 1970s, the ADL concept was extended to consider problems experienced by those living in the community, a field that has come to be termed Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL).7 There is a continued effort to validate these scales; some of the more commonly utilized, vali- dated IADL and ADL scales are listed in Table 1-3.7 Scales vary in their appropriateness for a given indi- vidual, based upon the level of impairment, body sys- tems affected, and degree of accuracy required. Some scales are most appropriate for an active, working population; others are more suited to a chronically ill, disabled population. Since there is no agreed-upon scale for a working population and physicians who use the Guides may evaluate different populations of individuals (ie, healthy or chronically ill), a physician may choose the most appropriate of any of the vali- dated scales for a more in-depth assessment of ADL, to obtain further information to supplement clinical judgment, or to gain assistance in determining where an individual stands within an impairment range.
6	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
ADL
Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides	7
8	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
1.2b Disability
The term disability has historically referred to a broad category of individuals with diverse limitations in the ability to meet social or occupational demands. However, it is more accurate to refer to the specific activity or role the “disabled” individual is unable to perform. Several organizations are moving away from the term disability and instead are referring to specific activity limitations to encourage an emphasis on the specific activities the individual can perform and to identify how the environment can be altered
to enable the individual to perform the activities associated with various social or occupational roles. (Table 1-1).4
According to a 1997 Institute of Medicine Report, “disability is a relational outcome, reflecting the individual’s capacity to perform a specific task or activity, contingent on the environmental conditions in which they are to be performed.”16 Disability is context-specific, not inherent in the individual, but a function of the interaction of the individual and the environment.
The World Health Organization (WHO) is revising its 1980 International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities and Handicaps and has released a draft document, The International Classification of Impairments, Activities and Participation (ICIDH-2).17 The term disability has been replaced by a neutral term, activity, and limits in ability are described as activity limitations. The change in terminology arose for several reasons: to choose terminology without an associated stigma, to avoid labeling, and to emphasize the person’s residual ability. Representatives world- wide are reviewing this international classification scale of impairments, function, and activities.
The Guides continues to define disability as an alteration of an individual’s capacity to meet per- sonal, social, or occupational demands or statu- tory or regulatory requirements because of an impairment.2 An individual can have a disability in performing a specific work activity but not have a disability in any other social role.2 Physicians have the education and training to evaluate a person’s health status and determine the presence or absence of an impairment. If the physician has the expertise and is well acquainted with the individual’s activities and needs, the physician may also express an opinion about the presence or absence of a specific disability. For example, an occupational medicine physician who understands the job requirements in a particular workplace can provide insights on how the impair- ment could contribute to a workplace disability.
The impairment evaluation, however, is only one aspect of disability determination. A disability deter- mination also includes information about the individ- ual’s skills, education, job history, adaptability, age, and environment requirements and modifications.3 Assessing these factors can provide a more realistic picture of the effects of the impairment on the ability to perform complex work and social activities. If adaptations can be made to the environment, the individual may not be disabled from performing that activity.
Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides	9
As discussed in this chapter and illustrated in Figure 1-1, medical impairments are not related to disability in a linear fashion. An individual with a medical impairment can have no disability for some occupa- tions, yet be very disabled for others. For example, severe degenerative disk disease may impair the functioning of the spine of both a licensed practical nurse and a bank president in a similar fashion when performing their activities of daily living. However, in terms of occupation, the bank president is less likely to be disabled by this impairment than the licensed practical nurse. An individual who develops rheumatoid arthritis may be disabled from work as a tailor but may be able to work as a child care aide. A pilot who develops a visual impairment, correctable with glasses, may be able to perform all of his daily activities but is no longer able to fly a commercial plane. An individual with repeated hernias and repairs may no longer be able to lift more than
20 kg (40 lb) but could work in a factory where mechanical lifts are available.
The Guides is not intended to be used for direct estimates of work disability. Impairment percentages derived according to the Guides criteria do not measure work disability. Therefore, it is inappropri- ate to use the Guides’ criteria or ratings to make direct estimates of work disability.
1.2c Handicap
Handicap is a term historically used in both a legal and a policy context to describe disability or people living with disabilities. Though the term continues to be used, generally it is being replaced with the pre- ferred term disability.
1.3 The Organ System and Whole Body Approach to
Impairment
The Guides impairment ratings reflect the severity and limitations of the organ/body system impairment and resulting functional limitations. Most organ/body systems chapters in the Guides provide impairment ratings that represent the extent of whole person impairment. In addition to listing whole per- son impairments, the musculoskeletal chapters pro- vide regional impairment ratings (eg, upper extremity, lower extremity); regional ratings are then converted into whole person impairment ratings. Within some musculoskeletal regions, a consensus group devel- oped weights to reflect the relative importance of certain regions. For example, different fingers or dif- ferent areas of the spine are given different weights, representing their unique and relative importance to the region’s overall functioning. These weights, which have gained acceptance in clinical practice, have been retained to enable regulatory authorities to convert from a regional body to whole person impair- ment when needed.
1.4 Philosophy and Use of the Combined
Values Chart
The Combined Values Chart (p. 604) was designed to enable the physician to account for the effects of multiple impairments with a summary value. A stan- dard formula was used to ensure that regardless of the number of impairments, the summary value would not exceed 100% of the whole person.
According to the formula listed in the combined val- ues chart, multiple impairments are combined so that the whole person impairment value is equal to or less than the sum of all the individual impairment values.
10	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
A scientific formula has not been established to indi- cate the best way to combine multiple impairments. Given the diversity of impairments and great vari- ability inherent in combining multiple impairments, it is difficult to establish a formula that accounts for all situations. A combination of some impairments could decrease overall functioning more than sug- gested by just adding the impairment ratings for the separate impairments (eg, blindness and inability to use both hands). When other multiple impairments are combined, a less than additive approach may be more appropriate. States also use different tech- niques when combining impairments. Many work- ers’ compensation statutes contain provisions that combine impairments to produce a summary rating that is more than additive. Other options are to com- bine (add, subtract, or multiply) multiple impair- ments based upon the extent to which they affect an individual’s ability to perform activities of daily liv- ing. The current edition has retained the same com- bined values chart, since it has become the standard of practice in many jurisdictions. Other approaches, when published in scientific peer-reviewed literature, will be evaluated for future editions.
In general, impairment ratings within the same region are combined before combining the regional impairment rating with that from another region. For example, when there are multiple impairments involving abnormal motion, neurologic loss, and amputation of an extremity part, these impairments first should be combined for a regional extremity impairment. The regional extremity impairment then is combined with an impairment from another region, such as from the respiratory system. Spinal impairments in multiple regions are combined.
Exceptions, as detailed in the musculoskeletal chap- ter, include impairments of the joints of the thumb, which are added, as are the ankle and subtalar joints in the lower extremity: both situations include com- plex motions.
1.5
Incorporating Science with Clinical
Judgment
The Guides uses objective and scientifically based data when available and references these sources. When objective data have not been identified, esti- mates of the degree of impairment are used, based on clinical experience and consensus. Subjective con- cerns, including fatigue, difficulty in concentrating, and pain, when not accompanied by demonstrable clinical signs or other independent, measurable abnormalities, are generally not given separate impairment ratings. Chronic pain is discussed in Chapter 18. Physicians recognize the local and dis- tant pain that commonly accompanies many disor- ders. Impairment ratings in the Guides already have accounted for commonly associated pain, including that which may be experienced in areas distant to the specific site of pathology. For example, when a cer- vical spine disorder produces radiating pain down the arm, the arm pain, which is commonly seen,
has been accounted for in the cervical spine impair- ment rating.
The Guides does not deny the existence or impor- tance of these subjective complaints to the individual or their functional impact. The Guides recommends that the physician ascertain and document subjective concerns. Because the presence and severity of sub- jective concerns varies among individuals with the same condition, the Guides has not yet identified an accepted method within the scientific literature to ascertain how these concerns consistently affect organ or body system functioning. The physician is encouraged to discuss these concerns and symptoms in the impairment evaluation.
Research is limited on the reproducibility and validity of the Guides.18-20 Anecdotal reports indicate that adoption of the Guides results in a more stan- dardized impairment assessment process. As relevant research becomes available, subsequent editions of the Guides will incorporate these evidence-based studies to improve the Guides’ reliability and validity.
Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides	11
Given the range, evolution, and discovery of new medical conditions, the Guides cannot provide an impairment rating for all impairments. Also, since some medical syndromes are poorly understood and are manifested only by subjective symptoms, impair- ment ratings are not provided for those conditions.
The Guides nonetheless provides a framework for evaluating new or complex conditions. Most adult conditions with measurable impairments can be eval- uated under the Guides. In situations where impair- ment ratings are not provided, the Guides suggests that physicians use clinical judgment, comparing measurable impairment resulting from the unlisted condition to measurable impairment resulting from similar conditions with similar impairment of func- tion in performing activities of daily living.
The physician’s judgment, based upon experience, training, skill, thoroughness in clinical evaluation, and ability to apply the Guides criteria as intended, will enable an appropriate and reproducible assess- ment to be made of clinical impairment. Clinical judgment, combining both the “art” and “science” of medicine, constitutes the essence of medical practice.
1.6 Causation, Apportionment Analysis, and Aggravation
1.6a Causation
Physicians may be asked to provide an opinion about the likelihood that a particular factor (injury, illness, or preexisiting condition) caused the permanent impairment. Determining causation is important from a legal perspective, as it is a factor in determin- ing liability.
The term causation has multiple meanings. Dorland’s Illustrated Medical Dictionary lists 12 different types of “cause” including constitutional, exciting, immediate, local, precipitating, predispos- ing, primary, proximate, remote, secondary, specific, and ultimate.21 For purposes of the Guides, causation means an identifiable factor (eg, accident or expo- sure to hazards of a disease) that results in a med- ically identifiable condition.
Medical or scientifically based causation requires a detailed analysis of whether the factor could have caused the condition, based upon scientific evidence and, specifically, experienced judgment as to whether the alleged factor in the existing environ- ment did cause the permanent impairment.22 Determining medical causation requires a synthesis of medical judgment with scientific analysis.
The legal standard for causation in civil litigation and in workers’ compensation adjudication varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.23 The physician needs to be aware of the different interpretations of causation and state the context in which the physi- cian’s opinion is being offered.
1.6 b Apportionment Analysis Apportionment analysis in workers’ compensation represents a distribution or allocation of causation among multiple factors that caused or significantly contributed to the injury or disease and resulting impairment. The factor could be a preexisting injury, illness, or impairment. In some instances, the physi- cian may be asked to apportion or distribute a perma- nent impairment rating between the impact of the current injury and the prior impairment rating. Before determining apportionment, the physician needs to verify that all the following information is true for an individual:
1. There is documentation of a prior factor.
2. The current permanent impairment is greater as a result of the prior factor (ie, prior impairment, prior injury, or illness).
3. There is evidence indicating the prior factor caused or contributed to the impairment, based on a reasonable probability (> 50% likelihood).
12	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
The apportionment analysis must consider the nature of the impairment and its possible relationship to each alleged factor, and it must provide an explana- tion of the medical basis for all conclusions and opinions. Most states have their own customized methods for calculating apportionment. Generally, the most recent permanent impairment rating is cal- culated, and then the prior impairment rating is cal- culated and deducted. The remaining impairment rating would be attributed or apportioned to the cur- rent injury or condition.
A common verbal formulation in the workers’ com- pensation context might state, “in cases of permanent disability less than total, if the degree of disability resulting from an industrial injury or occupational disease is increased or prolonged because of a pre- existing physical impairment, the employer shall be liable only for the additional disability from the injury or occupational disease.” 5
For example, in apportioning a spine impairment rating in an individual with a history of a spine con- dition, one should calculate the current spine impair- ment. Then calculate the impairment from any preexisting spine problem. The preexisting impair- ment rating is then subtracted from the present impairment rating to account for the effects of the former. This approach requires accurate and compa- rable data for both impairments.23
1.6c Aggravation
Aggravation, for the purposes of the Guides, refers to a factor(s) (eg, physical, chemical, biological, or medical condition) that alters the course or progres- sion of the medical impairment. For example, an individual develops low back pain and sciatica asso- ciated with the finding of an L3-L4 herniated disk. Symptoms continue but are intermittent and do not interfere with performing activities of daily living. A few years later, the individual twists his body while lifting a heavy package and develops constant, severe, acute low back pain and sciatica. Imaging studies show no change in the herniated disk com- pared to earlier studies. The lifting is considered to have aggravated a preexisting condition.
Terms such as causation, apportionment, and aggravation may all have unique legal definitions in the context of the system in which they are used. The physician is advised to compare these definitions with terminology accepted by the appropriate state or system.
1.7
Use of the Guides
Because of the scope, depth, standardized approach, and foundation in science and medical consensus, the Guides is used worldwide to estimate adult per- manent impairment. A survey completed in 1999 indicates that in the United States, 40 of 51 jurisdic- tions (50 states and the District of Columbia) use the Guides in workers’ compensation cases because of statute or regulations, or by administrative/legal practice.24
The Guides is formally accepted through adoptive language in each jurisdiction’s statutes (laws passed by a state legislature or the US Congress), court- made law (case law or precedent), or administrative agency regulation (rules promulgated by administra- tive agencies such as a state workers’ compensation board). It is this statutory, judicial, or regulatory adoptive language that determines which edition of the Guides is mandated in a particular jurisdiction. Some states, such as Oregon and Florida, have devel- oped their own impairment criteria, modeled on the concepts and material in the Guides. The Guides is also extensively used by the federal systems, eg, FECA (Federal Employees’ Compensation Act). The most recent edition of the Guides is recommended as the latest blend of science and medical consensus.
Beyond the United States, the Guides is used in Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and European countries for different applications, includ- ing workers’ compensation, personal injury, and dis- ability claim management. There is a growing international trend to adopt a standardized, medically accepted approach to impairment assessment such as in the Guides. As previously stated, the Guides is not to be used for direct financial awards nor as the sole measure of disability. The Guides provides a stan- dard medical assessment for impairment determina- tion and may be used as a component in disability assessment.
Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides	13
1.8 Impairment Evaluations in Workers’
Compensation
In the United States, workers’ compensation is a
no-fault system for providing cash benefits, medical care, and rehabilitation services to individuals with work-related injuries and diseases. All 50 states and the District of Columbia have workers’ compensation acts. Most acts share similar features, although no two are exactly alike. An employee normally must experience a “personal injury by accident arising out of and in the course of employment” to be eligible for benefits. All states provide benefits for workers with occupational diseases, but that coverage is restricted in many states. The claimant receives pay- ments to compensate for lost wages due to temporary total, temporary partial, permanent total, and perma- nent partial disability. Survivors receive death bene- fits. For each category of benefits, the state prescribes a maximum and minimum weekly benefit. Many states stipulate partial compensation for a par- tial loss, based upon a proportion of the number of weeks’ compensation allowed for total loss of the body part.25 Determining eligibility of benefits and the extent of disability is specified by statute and case law.
Because schedules usually do not cover all condi- tions arising from injuries, many laws allow or require that, in unlisted cases of permanent disability, the jurisdiction must determine the percentage by which the “whole man” or “industrial use” of the employee’s body was impaired. The board, commis- sion, or court also must consider the nature of the injury and the employee’s occupation, experience, training, and age and then award proportional com- pensation. Medical information is essential for the decision process in these cases.
Physicians who perform impairment and/or disability assessments for workers’ compensation purposes need to identify the state workers’ compensation law that applies to the situation, which is usually the state where the incident occurred. The physician needs to determine which edition of the Guides or other state guidelines are required for these assessments. This information can usually be obtained from the state workers’ compensation board or the state medical society. If the Guides is recommended or required, copies may be ordered through the AMA (see copy- right page) or other vendors.
Unfortunately, there is no validated formula that assigns accurate weights to determine how a medical condition can be combined with other factors, including education, skill, and the like, to calculate the effect of the medical impairment on future employment. Therefore, each commissioner or hear- ing official bases a decision on the assessment of the available medical and nonmedical information. The Guides may help resolve such a situation, but it can- not provide complete and definitive answers. Each administrative or legal system that bases disability ratings on permanent impairment defines its own process of converting impairment ratings into a dis- ability rating that reflects the degree to which the impairment limits the capacity to meet personal, social, occupational, and other demands, or to meet statutory requirements. The Guides is a tool for eval- uation of permanent impairment.26, 27
Impairment percentages derived from the Guides criteria should not be used as direct estimates of disability. Impairment percentages estimate the extent of the impairment on whole person func- tioning and account for basic activities of daily living, not including work. The complexity of work activities requires individual analyses.
Impairment assessment is a necessary first step
for determining disability.
1.9 Employability
Determinations
Physicians with the appropriate skills, training, and knowledge may address some of the implications of the medical impairment toward work disability and future employment. The physician may be asked whether an impaired individual can return to work in a particular job. The employer can provide a detailed job analysis, with the actual and anticipated essential requirements of the job and a review of the work environment, including potential hazards and the need for personal protective equipment. The physi- cian can then determine whether the individual’s abilities match the job demands. The physician needs to determine that the individual, in performing essen- tial job functions, will not either be endangered or endanger colleagues or the work environment. For example, it would be unsafe for an individual with a new, unstable seizure disorder to operate mechanical equipment. The physician and other responsible per- sons should keep in mind the potential for impair- ment aggravation, as well as the possibility of
14	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
changing an individual’s job responsibilities. After reviewing all the necessary information, the physician may then make an objective and repro-
ducible assessment of the ability of the individual to safely perform the essential functions of the job.
More complicated are the cases in which the physi- cian is requested to make a broad judgment regard- ing an individual’s ability to return to any job in his or her field. A decision of this scope usually requires input from medical and nonmedical experts, such as vocational specialists, and the evaluation of both sta- ble and changing factors, such as the person’s educa- tion, skills, and motivation, the state of the job market, and local economic considerations.
Physicians who follow the procedures outlined in the Guides, who review the same information from med- ical and employment records, and who examine the same patient with a stable condition should obtain approximately the same findings.
1.10 Railroad and
Maritime Workers
State workers’ compensation laws are not the only means by which employees are compensated for injuries or illnesses. In 1908, Congress passed the Federal Employer’ s Liability Act (FELA), which put in place a comprehensive injury compensation sys- tem for railroad workers. FELA provides a modified tort system for injured railroad workers, and it super- sedes state workers’ compensation laws. The Jones Act, passed in 1920, covers compensation for mar- itime workers injured due to a ship owner’s negli- gence. That law provides for the same rights and remedies that were extended through FELA.
A lawsuit filed under FELA must be based on the railroad’s negligence in providing the employee with a safe workplace. An injured employee must prove that the railroad should have foreseen that a condi- tion or activity might cause the injury or disease. The test determines whether the employer’s negligence played any part in producing the injury. Recoverable amounts include those for necessary medical expenses, pain and suffering, loss of past earnings, and future losses due to diminished earning capacity. An important condition for recovery is that a physi- cian must diagnose the effects of the injury.
Under FELA, all cases must go before a jury or judge, and there are no limits to the amount awarded. In contrast, the awards under state workers’ compen- sation systems are fixed and limited. Under FELA, the jury decides on the degree of the injured person’s disability. The physician is obligated to obtain a reli- able history, confirm past employment by obtaining records, and collect all available medical information.
1.11 The Physician’s Role Based on the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA)
Physicians, particularly occupational physicians, are frequently asked questions pertaining to work dis- ability and capacity, in light of increasing attention to compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). The ADA is a civil rights law that President Bush signed in 1990.28 It was intended “to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate to end discrimination against individuals with dis- abilities and bring those individuals into the eco- nomic and social mainstream of American life.”18 Under the ADA, individuals with disabilities are pro- tected against discrimination in such diverse areas as employment, government service entitlement, and access to public accommodations (eg, health care services, lodging).
The ADA defines disability as a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of an individual; a record of impairment; or being regarded as having an impair- ment (see Table 1-1). A person needs to meet only one of the three criteria in the definition to gain the ADA’s protection against discrimination. The physi- cian’s input often is essential for determining the first two criteria and valuable for determining the third.
Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides	15
To be deemed “disabled” for purposes of ADA pro- tection, an individual generally must have a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities. A “physical or mental impairment” could be any mental, psychological, or physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfig- urement, or anatomical loss that affects one or more of the following body systems: neurologic, special sense organs, musculoskeletal, respiratory (including speech organs), reproductive, cardiovascular, hema- tologic and lymphatic, digestive, genitourinary, skin, and endocrine.29
Conditions that are temporary or not considered to be severe (eg, normal pregnancy) are not considered impairments under the ADA. Other nonimpairments include features and conditions such as hair or eye color, left-handedness, old age, sexual orientation, exhibitionism, pedophilia, voyeurism, sexual addic- tion, kleptomania, pyromania, compulsive gambling, gender identity disorders not resulting from physical impairment, smoking, and current illegal drug use or resulting psychoactive disorders.
On June 23, 1999, in answer to a case seeking refine- ment of the definition of “who is disabled” under the ADA, the Supreme Court stated that individuals who function normally with aids such as glasses or med- ication could not generally be considered disabled, despite their physical impairments.30
To have the protection of the ADA, a physical or mental impairment must substantially limit the abil- ity to perform a “major life activity.” Major life activities include “basic activities that the average person in the general population can perform with little or no difficulty,” including caring for oneself, manual tasks, hearing, walking, learning, speaking, breathing, working, and reproduction. Major life activities do not have to occur frequently or be part of daily life.31 Note that the major life activities listed here include work, unlike the Guides’ impairment criteria.
The person must be presently, or perceived to be (not potentially or hypothetically), substantially limited in order to demonstrate a disability. It is difficult to determine if an impairment “substantially limits” a major life activity. An impairment’s nature, extent, duration, impact, and effect on the individual are all considerations in assessing the “substantiality” of the limitations.32
For some major life activities, such as work, the physician may provide an opinion on the medical impairment’s limitations. However, as indicated by the recent Supreme Court ruling, how much a limita- tion of a major life activity results in a determination of disability depends on the interaction between the remaining functional abilities and the possible types of accommodation being sought.33
The third criterion that may establish protection under the ADA is an erroneous perception that the individual is substantially limited in a major life activity or is being discriminated against on the basis of a real or perceived characteristic that does not sub- stantially limit a major life activity.
It is the physician’s responsibility to determine if the impairment results in functional limitations. The physician is responsible for informing the employer about an individual’s abilities and limitations. It is the employer’s responsibility to identify and deter- mine if reasonable accommodations are possible to enable the individual’s performance of essential job activities.
1.12  Summary
The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the philo- sophical assumptions and appropriate use of the Guides. The physician needs to comply with pre- scribed local, state, and federal practices for impair- ment evaluations. Generally, the physician evaluates all available information and provides as comprehen- sive a medical picture of the patient as possible, addressing the components listed in the Report of Medical Evaluation form discussed in Chapter 2.
A complete impairment evaluation provides valuable information beyond an impairment percentage, and it includes a discussion about the person’s abilities and limitations, including the ability to perform common activities as listed in Table 1-2. Combining the med- ical and nonmedical information, and including detailed information about essential work activities if requested, is a basis for improved understanding of the degree to which the impairment may affect the individual’s work ability.
16	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
================================================================================
Chapter 2
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Practical Application of the Guides
2.1 Defining Impairment Evaluations
2.2 Who Performs Impairment Evaluations?
2.3 Examiners’ Roles and Responsibilities
2.4 When Are Impairment Ratings Performed?
2.5 Rules for Evaluation
2.6 Preparing Reports
Introduction
This chapter describes how to use the Guides for consistent and reliable acquisition, analysis, commu- nication, and utilization of medical information through a single set of standards. Two physicians, following the methods of the Guides to evaluate the same patient, should report similar results and reach similar conclusions. Moreover, if the clinical find- ings are fully described, any knowledgeable observer may check the findings with the Guides criteria. This chapter provides information about the practical application of the Guides and is to be used in con- junction with Chapter 1, which provides the concep- tual framework upon which the instructions in this chapter are based.


17


2.1 Defining
Impairment Evaluations
An impairment evaluation is a medical evaluation performed by a physician, using a standard method as outlined in the Guides to determine permanent impairment associated with a medical condition. An impairment evaluation may include a numerical impairment percentage or rating, as defined in the Guides. An impairment evaluation is not the same as an independent medical evaluation (IME), which is performed by an independent medical examiner who evaluates but does not provide care for the indi- vidual. Impairment evaluations may be less compre- hensive than IMEs and may be performed by a treating physician or a nontreating physician, depending upon the state’s requirements and the preferences of the individual, physician, and request- ing party. Examples of an impairment evaluation and components of a comprehensive IME will be dis- cussed later in this chapter.


2.2 Who Performs Impairment
	Evaluations?
Impairment evaluations are performed by a licensed physician. The physician may use information from other sources, such as hearing results obtained from audiometry by a certified technician. However, the physician is responsible for performing a medical evaluation that addresses medical impairment in the body or organ system and related systems. A state may restrict the type of practitioner allowed to per- form an impairment evaluation, and some require additional state certification and other criteria, such as a minimum number of hours of practice, before the physician is approved as an impairment evalua- tor. The physician is encouraged to check with the local workers’ compensation agency, industrial acci- dent board, or industrial commission concerning their prerequisites.
2.3
Examiners’ Roles
	and Responsibilities
The physician’s role in performing an impairment evaluation is to provide an independent, unbiased assessment of the individual’s medical condition, including its effect on function, and identify abilities and limitations to performing activities of daily liv- ing as listed in Table 1-2. Performing an impairment evaluation requires considerable medical expertise and judgment. Full and complete reporting provides the best opportunity for physicians to explain health status and consequences to patients, other medical professionals, and other interested parties such as claims examiners and attorneys. Thorough documen- tation of medical findings and their impact will also ensure that reporting is fair and consistent and that individuals have the information needed to pursue any benefits to which they are entitled.

The skills required for impairment evaluation are usually not taught during basic medical training, although some specialties such as occupational med- icine, physical medicine and rehabilitation, and orthopedics have emphasized elements of the evalua- tion such as occupational, functional, or anatomical assessment.

In some cases, physicians may be asked to assess the medical impairment’s impact on the individual’s ability to work. In the latter case, physicians need to understand the essential functions of the occupation and specific job, as well as how the medical condi- tion interacts with the occupational demands. In many cases, the physician may need to obtain addi- tional expertise to define functional abilities and lim- itations, as well as vocational demands.

As an impairment evaluator, the physician has the responsibility to understand the regulations that per- tain to medical practice in his or her specific area, as in workers’ compensation or personal injury evalua- tions. It is also the responsibility of the physician to provide the necessary medical assessment to the party requesting the evaluation, with the examinee’s consent. The physician needs to ensure that the examinee understands that the evaluation’s purpose is medical assessment, not medical treatment.
However, if new diagnoses are discovered, the physi- cian has a medical obligation to inform the request- ing party and individual about the condition and recommend further medical assessment.


2.4 When Are Impairment Ratings
	Performed?
An impairment should not be considered permanent until the clinical findings indicate that the medical condition is static and well stabilized, often termed the date of maximal medical improvement (MMI). It is understood that an individual’s condition is dynamic. Maximal medical improvement refers to a date from which further recovery or deterioration is not anticipated, although over time there may be some expected change. Once an impairment has reached MMI, a permanent impairment rating may be performed. The Guides attempts to take into account all relevant considerations in rating the severity and extent of permanent impairment and its effect on the individual’s activities of daily living.

Impairments often involve more than one body sys- tem or organ system; the same condition may be dis- cussed in more than one chapter. Generally, the organ system where the problems originate or where the dysfunction is greatest is the chapter to be used for evaluating the impairment. Thus, consult the vision chapter for visual problems due to optic nerve dys- function. Refer to the extremity chapters for neuro- logical and musculoskeletal extremity impairment from an injury. However, if the impairment is due to a stroke, the neurology chapter is most appropriate.
Whenever the same impairment is discussed in differ- ent chapters, the Guides tries to use consistent impair- ment ratings across the different organ systems.


2.5  Rules for Evaluation

2.5a Confidentiality
Prior to performing an impairment evaluation, the physician obtains the individual’s consent to share the medical information with other parties that will be reviewing the evaluation. If the evaluating physi- cian is also that person’s treating physician, the physician needs to indicate to the individual which information from his or her medical record will
be shared.

2.5b Combining Impairment Ratings
To determine whole person impairment, the physi- cian should begin with an estimate of the individual’s most significant (primary) impairment and evaluate other impairments in relation to it. It may be neces- sary for the physician to refer to the criteria and esti- mates in several chapters if the impairing condition involves several organ systems. Related but separate conditions are rated separately and impairment rat- ings are combined unless criteria for the second impairment are included in the primary impairment. For example, an individual with an injury causing neurologic and muscular impairment to his upper extremity would be evaluated under the upper extremity criteria in Chapter 16. Any skin impairment due to significant scarring would be rated separately in the skin chapter and combined with the impairment from the upper extremity chapter. Loss of nerve func- tion would be rated within either the musculoskeletal chapters or neurology chapter.

In the case of two significant yet unrelated condi- tions, each impairment rating is calculated sepa- rately, converted or expressed as a whole person impairment, then combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604). The general philosophy of the Combined Values Chart is discussed in Chapter 1.
2.5c Consistency
Consistency tests are designed to ensure reproducibil- ity and greater accuracy. These measurements, such as one that checks the individual’s lumbosacral spine range of motion (Section 15.9) are good but imperfect indicators of people’s efforts. The physician must use the entire range of clinical skill and judgment when assessing whether or not the measurements or tests results are plausible and consistent with the impair- ment being evaluated. If, in spite of an observation or test result, the medical evidence appears insufficient to verify that an impairment of a certain magnitude exists, the physician may modify the impairment rating accordingly and then describe and explain the reason for the modification in writing.


2.5d Interpolating, Measuring, and Rounding Off
In deciding where to place an individual’s impair- ment rating within a range, the physician needs to consider all the criteria applicable to the condition, which includes performing activities of daily living, and estimate the degree to which the medical impair- ment interferes with these activities. In some cases, the physician may need additional information to determine where to place an individual in the range.

As with any biological measurements, some variabil- ity and normal fluctuations are inherent in permanent impairment ratings. Two measurements made by the same examiner using the Guides that involve an indi- vidual or an individual’s functions would be consis- tent if they fall within 10% of each other.
Measurements should also be consistent between two trained observers or by one observer on two sep- arate occasions, assuming the individual’s condition is stable. Repeating measurements may decrease error and result in a measurement that is closer to average function. The final calculated whole person impairment rating, whether it is based on the evalua- tion of one organ system or several organ systems, should be rounded to the nearest whole number.
2.5e Pain
The impairment ratings in the body organ system chapters make allowance for any accompanying pain. Chronic pain, also called chronic pain syn- drome, is discussed in the chapter on pain (Chapter 18).
2.5f Using Assistive Devices in Evaluations If an individual’s prosthesis or assistive device can be removed or its use eliminated relatively easily, the physician should usually test and evaluate the organ system without the device. For example, ask the patient to remove a hearing aid before testing audi- tory acuity. The examiner may choose also to test the system with the assistive device in place and then report both sets of results. The physician may also choose to report alterations in the individual’s organ function with and without use of the device and chal- lenges that are posed by using the device, if any.

If the assistive device is not easily removable, as with an implanted lens, evaluate the organ system’s functioning with the device in place. Test the visual system with the patient’s glasses or contact lenses in place if they are used.

2.5g Adjustments for Effects of Treatment or Lack of Treatment
In certain instances, the treatment of an illness may result in apparently total remission of the person’s signs and symptoms. Examples include the treatment of hypothyroidism with levothyroxine and the treat- ment of type 1 diabetes mellitus with insulin. Yet it is debatable whether, with treatment, the patient has actually regained the previous status of normal good health. In these instances, the physician may choose to increase the impairment estimate by a small per- centage (eg, 1% to 3%).

In some instances, as with organ transplant recipients who are treated with immunity-suppressing pharma- ceuticals or persons treated with anticoagulants, the pharmaceuticals themselves may lead to impair- ments. In such an instance, the physician should use the appropriate parts of the Guides to evaluate impairment related to pharmaceutical effects. If information in the Guides is lacking, the physician may combine an estimated impairment percent based on the severity of the effect, with the primary organ system impairment, by means of the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

A patient may decline surgical, pharmacologic, or therapeutic treatment of an impairment. If a patient declines therapy for a permanent impairment, that decision neither decreases nor increases the esti- mated percentage of the individual’s impairment. However, the physician may wish to make a written comment in the medical evaluation report about the suitability of the therapeutic approach and describe the basis of the individual’s refusal. The physician may also need to address whether the impairment is at maximal medical improvement without treatment and the degree of anticipated improvement that could be expected with treatment.


2.5h Changes in Impairment from Prior Ratings
Although a previous evaluator may have considered a medical impairment to be permanent, unanticipated changes may occur: the condition may have become worse as a result of aggravation or clinical progres- sion, or it may have improved. The physician should assess the current state of the impairment according to the criteria in the Guides. If an individual received an impairment rating from an earlier edition and needs to be reevaluated because of a change in the medical condition, the individual is evaluated according to the latest information pertaining to the condition in the current edition of the Guides.

Valid assessment of a change in the impairment esti- mate would depend on the reliability of the previous estimate and the evidence upon which it was based. If a prior impairment evaluation was not performed, but sufficient historical information is available to currently estimate the prior impairment, the assess- ment would be performed based on the most recent Guides criteria. However, if the information is insuf- ficient to accurately document the change, then the physician needs to explain that decision and should not estimate a change.

If apportionment is needed, the analysis must con- sider the nature of the impairment and its relation- ship to each alleged causative factor, providing an explanation of the medical basis for all conclusions and opinions. (Apportionment and causation are con- sidered more fully in Chapter 1 and are briefly defined in the Glossary.) For example, in apportion- ing a spine impairment, first the current spine impairment rating is calculated, and then an impair- ment rating from any preexisting spine problem is calculated. The value for the preexisting impairment rating can be subtracted from the present impairment rating to account for the effects of the intervening injury or disease. Using this approach to apportion- ment requires accurate information and data to deter- mine both impairment ratings. If different editions of the Guides are used, the physician needs to assess their similarity. If the basis of the ratings is similar, a subtraction is appropriate. If they differ markedly, the physician needs to evaluate the circumstances and determine if conversion to the earlier or latest edition of the Guides for both ratings is possible. The determination should follow any state guidelines and should consider whichever edition best describes the individual’s impairment.

2.6 Preparing Reports
A clear, accurate, and complete report is essential to support a rating of permanent impairment. The fol- lowing elements in bold type should be included in all impairment evaluation reports. Other elements listed in italics are commonly found within an IME or may be requested for inclusion in an impairment evaluation.
2.6a Clinical Evaluation
2.6a.1 Include a narrative history of the medical condition(s) with the onset and course of the condi- tion, symptoms, findings on previous examination(s), treatments, and responses to treatment, including adverse effects. Include information that may be rele- vant to onset, such as an occupational exposure or injury. Historical information should refer to any relevant investigations. Include a detailed list of
prior evaluations in the clinical data section.

2.6a.2 Include a work history with a detailed, chronological description of work activities, specific type and duration of work performed, materials used in the workplace, any temporal associations with the medical condition and work, frequency, intensity, and duration of exposure and activity, and any pro- tective measures.

2.6a.3 Assess current clinical status, including current symptoms, review of symptoms, physical examination, and a list of contemplated treatment, rehabilitation, and any anticipated reevaluation.
2.6a.4 List diagnostic study results and outstand- ing pertinent diagnostic studies. These may include laboratory tests, electrocardiograms, exercise stress studies, radiographic and other imaging studies, rehabilitation evaluations, mental status examina- tions, and other tests or diagnostic procedures.

2.6a.5 Discuss the medical basis for determining whether the person is at MMI. If not, estimate and discuss the expected date of full or partial recovery.


2.6 a.6 Discuss diagnoses, impairments.

2.6a.7 Discuss causation and apportionment, if requested, according to recommendations outlined in Chapters 1 and 2.
2.6a.8 Discuss impairment rating criteria, prognosis, residual function, and limitations. Include a discussion of the anticipated clinical course and whether further medical treatment is anticipated. Describe the residual function and the impact of the medical impairment(s) on the ability to perform activities of daily living and, if requested, complex activities such as work. List the types of affected activities (see Table 1-2). Identify any medical con- sequences for performing activities of daily living.

If requested, the physician may need to analyze differ- ent job tasks to determine if an individual has the residual function to perform that complex activity.
The physician should also identify any medical con- sequence of performing a complex activity such as work.

2.6a.9 Explain any conclusion about the need for restrictions or accommodations for standard activities of daily living or complex activities such as work.

2.6b Calculate the Impairment Rating Compare the medical findings with the impair- ment criteria listed within the Guides and calculate the appropriate impairment rating. Discuss how spe- cific findings relate to and compare with the criteria described in the applicable Guides chapter. Refer to and explain the absence of any pertinent data and how the physician determined the impairment rating with limited data.


2.6c. Discuss How the Impairment Rating Was Calculated
2.6c.1 Include an explanation of each impairment value with reference to the applicable criteria of the Guides. Combine multiple impairments for a whole person impairment.
2.6c.2 Include a summary list of impairments and impairment ratings by percentage, including calcula- tion of the whole person impairment.

On the following two pages is a standard form that the evaluator may use to ensure that all essential elements are included in the impairment evaluation report. The form may be reproduced without permission from the American Medical Association. Most chapters include a summary form that identifies the salient, specific features to consider for each category of organ system impairment.


Calculated total whole person impairment:	%. Discussion of rationale of impairment rating and any possible inconsistencies in the examination:




================================================================================
Chapter 3: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Cardiovascular System: Heart and Aorta
3.1 Principles of Assessment
3.2 Valvular Heart Disease
3.3 Coronary Heart Disease
3.4 Congenital Heart Disease
3.5 Cardiomyopathies
3.6 Pericardial Heart Disease
3.7 Arrhythmias
3.8 Cardiovascular Impairment Evaluation Summary
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating perma- nent impairments of the cardiovascular system and their effects on an individual’s ability to perform the activities of daily living. The cardiovascular system consists of the heart, the aorta, the systemic arteries, and the pulmonary arteries. Impairment of the heart is the focus of this chapter; impairment of diseases of the aorta, the systemic arteries, and pulmonary arter- ies (including coronary and peripheral circulation) are included in Chapter 4.

The following sections have been revised from the fourth edition: (1) information about valvular heart disease reflecting newly published guidelines from the American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology; (2) information about coro- nary artery disease reflecting the important prognos- tic impact of left ventricular function on impairment in individuals with coronary artery disease, and the inclusion of silent ischemia and coronary artery spasm with regard to impairment; and (3) informa- tion about cardiomyopathy, including the impact of HIV-related conditions that affect cardiac function.


25


3.1 Principles of
	Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for per- forming and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.


3.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs Some impairment classes refer to limitations in the ability to perform daily activities because of symptoms. When this information is subjective and possibly misinterpreted, it should not serve as the sole criterion upon which decisions about impairment are made. Rather, the examiner should obtain objective data about the extent of the limitation and integrate the findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent impairment. See the functional classifications of cardiac disease in Table 3-1.


Exercise Testing
When feasible, the physician should attempt to quan- tify limitations due to symptoms by observing the individual during exercise.2 A motor-driven treadmill with varying grades and speeds is the most widely used device for standardized exercise protocols. The protocols vary slightly, but they all attempt to relate the exercise to excess energy expended and to func- tional class. The excess energy expended is usually expressed in terms of the “MET,” which represents the multiples of resting metabolic energy used for any given activity. One MET is considered to be
3.5 mL (kg/min). The 70-kg man who burns 1.2 kcal/min while sitting at rest uses approximately 3 METS when walking 4 km/h.

Table 3-2 displays the relationship of excess energy expenditures in METS to functional class according to the protocols of several investigators. With all pro- tocols, the exercise periods last for 2 or 3 minutes; the time periods are represented in the table by boxes with numbers giving the estimated METS involved.


*Adapted from: Criteria Committee of the New York Heart Association. Diseases of the Heart and Blood Vessels: Nomenclature and Criteria for Disease. 6th ed. Boston, Mass: Little Brown & Co; 1964. This well-established classification is preferred over the newer classification introduced in the 7th edition.1


*Adapted from: Fox SM III, Naughton JP, Haskell WL. Physical activity and the prevention of coronary heart disease. Ann Clin Res. 1971;3:404-432.3


*Source: American College of Sports Medicine. Guidelines for Graded Exercise Testing and Exercise Prescription. Philadelphia, Pa: Lea and Febiger; 1975:17.


A major problem with the use of any exercise-testing technique to attempt to quantify an individual’s func- tional capacity is the marked variability in people’s efforts and abilities. Therefore, while measuring the maximum oxygen consumption response, the health care professional should estimate and note the indi- vidual’s cooperation and effort during the test; eg, some will continue longer than they should, while others will stop after minimal effort because they feel fatigued.


Functional Capacity
The functional capacity of an individual depends on age, gender, and level of training. The functional class determined by means of Tables 3-2 and 3-3 may not be applicable to people at the ends of the age spectrum, such as a 20-year-old athlete or an inactive 70-year-old woman. Therefore, it may be useful to calculate a “percentage functional aerobic capacity” that is achieved on an exercise test.
Standard charts are available for the various exercise protocols that determine the percentage functional aerobic capacity based on total exercise duration, age, gender, and level of training.4


Left Ventricle Function
Knowledge of the status of the left ventricle is impor- tant to assess in the examination and evaluation of an individual with cardiac disease. Two phases of left ventricular (LV) function contribute to the person’s symptoms and condition: systolic function, which is the ability of the heart to pump out blood during con- traction; and diastolic function, the process by which the heart fills with blood during relaxation of the myocardium and a passive filling phase.5


Ejection Fraction
A clinically used measure of systolic function is the “ejection fraction” (EF), the percentage of blood the heart is able to eject during one beat. Echocardiogra- phy, radionuclide angiography, and left ventriculog- raphy are commonly used to measure the EF. A normal EF is greater than to 0.50; EFs of 0.40 to
0.50 indicate mild systolic dysfunction; 0.30 to 0.40, moderate systolic dysfunction; and < 0.30, severe systolic dysfunction.

Diastolic Dysfunction
Diastolic dysfunction may contribute to the signs and symptoms of heart failure (HF), but quantifying the degree of dysfunction is problematic. Diastolic dys- function is usually diagnosed clinically by elevated filling pressures that result in HF in the absence of systolic dysfunction or valvular abnormalities.
Echocardiography with cardiac Doppler is emerging as an accepted tool for the assessment of diastolic function.3, 5-7


3.1b Determination of Impairment Impairment classes, as listed in Tables 3-5 through 3-11, are disease-specific and based on the NYHA classification system as listed in Table 3-1. The impairment classes reflect anatomic, physiologic,
and functional abnormalities. For example, the infor- mation in Table 3-1 category I of the NYHA system is represented in the corresponding class 1 on Table 3-5. The classes listed in Tables 3-5 through 3-11 apply the NYHA functional classification to specific disease conditions. The percentages of impairment reflect the severity of the condition and the extent to which the condition limits the abilities to do activi- ties of daily living.

In the illustrative examples of impairment in this chapter, any historic, physical examination, or labo- ratory information or data not described should be considered to be within normal limits.

In summary, an evaluation of the cardiovascular system that falls within normal range reflects an individual who performs all activities of daily living without cardiovascular symptoms, has some reserve capacity that allows comfortable exercise without the development of major cardiovascular symptoms, has an LV ejection fraction that falls within normal limits, and completes at least 80% of age- and gender-predicted functional aerobic capacity during exercise stress testing.


3.2 Valvular Heart
	Disease
Congenital, rheumatic, infectious, or traumatic fac- tors or a combination of those factors may cause valvular heart disease. Valvular disease may result in
(1) pressure hypertrophy of the left or right ventricle (RV), causing elevated filling pressures, myocardial ischemia, and eventual LV dysfunction with signs and symptoms of congestive heart failure (CHF);
(2) volume hypertrophy of the LV or RV, causing ventricular dilatation and eventual irreversible myocardial dysfunction with signs and symptoms of CHF; (3) inflow obstruction to the ventricles causing congestion of organs, even in the absence of ventric- ular dysfunction; or (4) decreased cardiac output.5

Valvular heart disease can be detected and its sever- ity assessed by means of a thorough history and physical examination and should be confirmed by either Doppler echocardiography or cardiac catheter- ization.8 A valve gradient measures the pressure drop across a stenotic valve and is proportional to the severity of obstruction. Since the valve gradient is influenced by the cardiac output, the valve gradient calculates a valve area that takes into consideration both the pressure gradient and the cardiac output.
There may be technical limitations to these derived variables. Their correlation with the severity of the stenosis is shown in Table 3-4.


* Severity of stenosis also may be indexed to body surface area.


The severity of a regurgitant valve lesion is more dif- ficult to assess than that of a stenotic lesion. Physical examination and Doppler echocardiography may provide a qualitative assessment. Although Doppler echocardiography may help the physician determine a mild or severe regurgitant valve lesion, this tech- nique’s inherent limitations preclude an accurate assessment of intermediate grades of severity.
Cardiac catheterization may be required for a semi- quantitative estimate of the valve lesion’s severity; it can provide a view of the contrast medium’s inten- sity as it crosses the regurgitating valve into the receiving heart chamber. To assess the severity of aortic valve regurgitation, obtain the estimate with aortic root angiography; to assess the severity of mitral valve regurgitation, obtain the estimate with left ventriculography.

Catheter-based interventional procedures, operative repair, or prosthetic valve replacement can reduce the severity of, but not fully repair, valvular heart dis- ease. After any of these procedures, allow sufficient time to elapse from the date of surgery for
maximum recovery and reconditioning of the heart, lungs, and other organs before estimating permanent impairment.

In addition, because medication may affect the sever- ity of valvular heart disease, especially limitations due to symptoms, allow sufficient time for medica- tion to be introduced and adjusted and to take effect before estimating permanent impairment.


3.2 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Valvular Heart Disease The impairment criteria for valvular heart disease are given in Table 3-5.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-2
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Valvular Heart Disease
Subject: 38-year-old-woman.
History: Systolic murmur on insurance physical exam. Played collegiate sports. Marathon runner.
Current Symptoms: Denies dyspnea, angina, palpi- tations, or fatigue.
Physical Exam: Blood pressure (BP): normal; pulse rate (PR): 52 BPM; mid-peaking systolic ejection murmur.
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram: bicuspid aortic valve; mean gradient of 22 mm Hg; valve area 1.5 cm2. ECG: tall R-waves and slight ST depression
in precordial leads V and V in excess of 25 mm.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-1
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Valvular Heart Disease

Subject: 22-year-old woman.
History: Midsystolic click and late systolic murmur.
Current Symptoms: None. No signs of cardiac enlargement, HF, or cardiac rhythm disturbance.
Physical Exam: Slight pectus excavatum.
Clinical Studies: ECG: normal; echocardiogram: mitral valve prolapse, normal left atrium (LA) and LV size and function.
Diagnosis: Mitral valve prolapse syndrome.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: If definite T-wave abnormalities, or slight enlargement of the LA or LV, then estimate valve disorder impairment at 1% to 9%, depending on the severity of the abnormality. If aortic regurgita- tion murmur but no symptoms or signs of cardiac enlargement and CHF, then estimate is lower.
LV size and function may be present; assess with 2-dimensional echocardiography (2DE) or radionuclide angiography to rule out significant LV dilation or dysfunction.
---END EXAMPLE---
Chest roentgenogram: normal.
Diagnosis: Asymptomatic mild aortic stenosis sec- ondary to a bicuspid aortic valve with electrocar- diographic evidence of LV hypertrophy.
Impairment Rating: 1% to 9% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Antibiotic prophylaxis before dental or surgical procedure to minimize risk of bacterial endocarditis. Periodic cardiac follow-up for pro- gression of aortic stenosis. Aortic valve surgery necessary later in life.
---END EXAMPLE---

Comment: Impairment greater if (1) a diastolic decrescendo murmur; (2) the systolic gradient across the prosthesis > Doppler-derived normal values for the type of prosthesis; or (3) mild recurrent dyspnea. Cardiac catheterization not necessary for estimate.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-3
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Valvular Heart Disease

Subject: 66-year-old woman.
History: Progressive HF; culminated in several syn- copal episodes 3 years ago. Severe calcific steno- sis of the aortic valve; depressed systolic function. Aortic valve replacement with large St. Jude’s bileaflet prosthesis.
Current Symptoms: Returned to normal life; walks 2 miles daily. Maintenance: oral anticoagulants. Prothrombin time level every 3 weeks. Antibiotics before dental or operative procedures; no other medication.
Physical Exam: BP and PR: normal. No signs of HF. Slightly sustained apical impulse. 1/6 early systolic murmur in first right intercostal space. S : normal; S : crisp, closing click of the pros- thetic valve.
Clinical Studies: ECG: rhythm, QRS pattern nor- mal; low T waves in I, L, V , and V . Chest

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-4
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Valvular Heart Disease


Subject: 63-year-old man.
History: Mild CHF and aortic regurgitation 5 years ago. Restricts salt intake; no cardiac medications. Golfs regularly.
Current Symptoms: None.
Physical Exam: BP: 160/50 mm Hg; PR: 70 BPM; bounding peripheral pulses, lungs clear, apex impulse slightly lateral to midclavicular line (MCL); S and S normal; 3/6 harsh aortic ejection murmur; 3/6 long decrescendo diastolic murmur.
Clinical Studies: ECG: borderline voltage for left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). Chest roentgenogram: no cardiomegaly or pulmonary congestion. Echocardiogram: normal size aortic root; trileaflet aortic valve; fluttering anterior leaflet of the mitral valve; normal LV systolic function with moderate dilation. Doppler: moder- ately severe aortic regurgitation; no stenosis.
Diagnosis: Moderately severe aortic regurgitation of uncertain cause.
Impairment Rating: 20% to 29% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Asymptomatic but impaired. Higher esti- mate if LV systolic dysfunction. Cardiac catheter- ization, angiography were not necessary for estimate. Elevated BP needs treatment. If eleva- tion of BP persists after treatment, then estimate
---END EXAMPLE---
5	6	impairment due to hypertension per Table 4-2.
roentgenogram: slight prominence heart apex; prosthesis properly positioned: no evidence of pulmonary congestion. Echocardiogram: normal size ventricles; thickening of LV wall; prosthesis properly positioned, mean gradient 10 mm Hg across the prosthesis; slight regurgitation. LV sys- tolic function mildly depressed; 0.45 LVEF.
Diagnosis: Calcific aortic stenosis, probably related to congenital bicuspid aortic valve, and valve replacement.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.


Comment: Greater exercise tolerance and less car- diomegaly for lower impairment. If reduced sys- tolic function, increase impairment. Cardiac catheterization not necessary for estimate.
Consider surgical treatment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-5
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Valvular Disease

Subject: 71-year-old man.
History: Nonresponsive thrombocytopenia. Moderate exertional dyspnea for 2 years despite diuretics and digoxin.
Current Symptoms: Comfortable at rest; becomes short of breath (SOB) when climbing to second floor. Sleeps on two pillows; has not awakened SOB since diuretic increase 1 year earlier. Lies flat comfortably.
Physical Exam: BP: 110/80 mm Hg; PR: irregular— 84 BPM. Venous pressure (VP): normal; no edema. Harsh breath sounds at each base; no rales. Apical impulse: large, hyperdynamic, displaced to the anterior axillary line. Slight parasternal heave. S ,S : loud; 4/6 holosystolic murmur at lower ster-

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-6
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Valvular Heart Disease


Subject: 60-year-old woman.
History: Seamstress; surgical replacement of aortic and mitral valves 1 year earlier. Little stamina despite oral anticoagulants, digoxin, diuretics, salt restrictions. Tired easily; rested each afternoon.
Sometime ankle edema resolved after extra diuretic.
Current Symptoms: No nocturnal dyspnea; sleeps with one pillow. Light housework possible; not well enough to return to work. Weight 6.8 kg (15 lb) below preoperative weight.
Physical Exam: Comfortable lying flat.
BP: 110/70 mm Hg; PR: irregular—80 BPM. Venous pressure: normal; no edema. Lungs: clear.
Clinical Studies: Apical impulse: enlarged, sus- tained through systole at anterior axillary line; no parasternal heave; normal prosthetic valve sounds; 1/6 early systolic murmur in first right intercostal space, along the left sternal border. ECG: atrial fibrillation; irregular ventricular response 80/min. Completes stage I Bruce protocol on treadmill; fatigue and SOB at stage II (5 METS). Chest roentgenogram: cardiomegaly; LV, LA enlarge- ment. Upper lobes vasculature prominent.

1	2

nal border, apex, and left axilla. Audible S .
Clinical Studies: ECG: atrial fibrillation; irregular ventricular response 80/min. Low T waves; QRS pattern normal. Chest roentgenogram: car- diomegaly; large LA. Upper lobes vasculature prominent. Echocardiogram: 2DE: flail mitral leaflet. Doppler: Severe mitral regurgitation; esti- mated peak systolic pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) 50 mm Hg. Mild LV and moderate LA enlargement; hyperdynamic systolic function.
Diagnosis: Severe mitral regurgitation due to mitral valve prolapse with a flail leaflet. Atrial fibrillation with a controlled ventricular response at rest.
Impairment Rating: 40% to 49% impairment of the whole person.

Echocardiogram: no prosthetic valve malfunction or displacement. Ventricles, LA slightly enlarged. LV systolic function normal.
Diagnosis: Aortic and mitral valve disease, probably rheumatic in origin; surgical replacement of valves.
Impairment Rating: 40% to 49% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Bruce protocol: class I if exertion
> 6 minutes; class II if 3 to 6 minutes; class III if 1 to 3 minutes; and class IV if < 1 minute.
---END EXAMPLE---

Diagnosis: Mitral valve replacement with a prosthesis; LV dysfunction, with probable rheumatic origin.
Impairment Rating: 70% to 79% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Cardiac catheterization, though done, not essential for estimate.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-7
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Valvular Heart Disease
Subject: 50-year-old man.
History: Mitral valve replacement 2 years earlier; advanced symptoms and signs of CHF caused pul- monary and systemic circulation congestion.
Activities remained limited by dyspnea on minimal exertion despite restriction of activities and salt intake, and digoxin and diuretics. Vigorous diuretic use eliminated peripheral edema but resulted in chemical evidence of prerenal azotemia.
Current Symptoms: Walks a city block at a normal pace, drives, and sleeps comfortably; breathless after climbing one flight of stairs.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-8
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Valvular Heart Disease


Subject: 45-year-old woman.
History: CHF for 10 years. Breathlessness and fatigue with minimal exertion, despite diuretics, digoxin, and, for the past year, a peripheral vasodilator. Slept on three pillows. Long-term ankle edema; protuberant abdomen for last year. Unable to do most activities of daily living with- out assistance.
Physical Exam: Pale and weak; thin, jaundiced face showed temporal depression. Breaths: 22/min; BP: 110/70 mm Hg; PR: irregular—80 BPM. Preferred sitting position. Neck veins distended to the mid-neck; prominent V waves. Lung sounds: rales at both lung bases: parasternal heave. 3/6 harsh, long, systolic murmur in second right inter- costal space that stopped in late systole, then a long, loud, decrescendo diastolic murmur.
Blowing holosystolic murmur at the lower sternal border; mid-diastolic rumble at the apex.
Diminished S ; S loud in the second left inter-

1	2

Physical Exam: Comfortable; BP: 110/70 mm Hg; PR: irregular—80 BPM. Venous pressure: normal; no peripheral edema. Lung sounds: rales at the left base. Apical impulse: normal; parasternal heave. Prosthetic valve sounds: normal; 1/6 holosystolic murmur at the apex.
Clinical Studies: ECG: atrial fibrillation; irregular ventricular response 80 BPM; low T waves. Chest roentgenogram: cardiomegaly; enlarged LV, RV, LA. Prominent pulmonary vasculature in all lung fields; no Kerley B lines. Properly positioned prosthetic valve. Echocardiogram: enlarged ven- tricles and LA. Moderate global reduction LV sys- tolic function; LVEF 0.30. Well-seated prosthetic valve; normal mean gradient 5 mm Hg across the valve; normal mild degree of periprosthetic regur- gitation. Cardiac catheterization and angiography: LV pressure: 110/18 mm Hg; mean LA pressure: 20 mm Hg. PAP: 45/18 mm Hg. LV angiogram: mild mitral regurgitation; reduction of ventricular contraction.

costal space. Liver was large, pulsatile, approxi- mately 12 cm. Ascites, pitting edema of the thighs, sacral area, and legs.
Clinical Studies: ECG: atrial fibrillation; irregular ventricular response: 80 BPM; low-voltage QRS and T waves. Chest roentgenogram: massive car- diomegaly suggesting enlargement of all cham- bers. Vascular prominence and Kerley B lines on both sides of the upper lobes. Echocardiogram: enlargement of all chambers; LVEF 0.20. 2DE: heavy calcification of aortic and mitral valves.
Doppler: severe aortic stenosis, mitral regurgita- tion, tricuspid regurgitation, moderate aortic regur- gitation, and mitral stenosis. PAP: 70 mm Hg.
Diagnosis: Aortic and mitral stenosis and regurgita- tion, and tricuspid regurgitation.
Impairment Rating: 90% to 99% impairment of the whole person.


3.3 Coronary Heart
	Disease
Coronary heart disease (CHD) is most commonly due to arteriosclerosis of the coronary arteries, resulting in reduced coronary blood flow. Other causes of limited or reduced coronary blood flow include coronary artery spasm, emboli, congenital abnormalities, and trauma. Inflammatory processes and arthritis also can obstruct the coronary arteries, especially the coronary ostia.

Reduced coronary flow resulting in transient ischemia or in permanent injury to the myocardium causes angina pectoris, which may impair a person’s ability to perform activities of daily living. Infarction or diffuse fibrosis and a decrease in EF causes per- manent injury. The degree of the patient’s impair- ment is determined by the consequences of both the reduced coronary blood flow and the reduced ven- tricular function. In addition, reduced coronary blood flow and myocardial damage may cause cardiac arrhythmias. (See Section 3.6).9


The physician must obtain a detailed history to esti- mate the degree of impairment due to CHD. The physical examination contributes to the estimate of the disorder’s severity, and especially to the estimate of the degree of ventricular function impairment. In most individuals, laboratory studies will also be nec- essary. Studies obtained at rest, during exercise, and after exercise are especially useful in examining peo- ple suspected of having CHD. Knowledge of ventric- ular function should usually be obtained for all individuals. If there is a normal examination, normal heart size on chest x-ray, and normal resting ECG, the EF should be normal. Coronary angiography may be necessary in some.2,6, 10

Exercise training programs, cessation of cigarette smoking, use of medications, and surgical procedures can reduce but not eliminate impairment due to CHD. Allow sufficient time for these measures to have an effect before estimating permanent impairment.


3.3 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Coronary Heart Disease Impairment criteria for CHD are given in Table 3-6.


*Source: Sheffield LH. Exercise stress testing. In: Braunwald E, ed. Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1988:227.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-9
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Coronary Heart Disease
Subject: 55-year-old woman.
History: Cigarette smoker; family history of CHD. CT scan: calcium score in the 99th percentile.
Subsequently referred to physician.
Current Symptoms: Denies angina, dyspnea, or fatigue. Worried about dying of a heart attack because of mother’s death from MI at 62.
Physical Exam: Mild hyperlipidemia (total choles- terol: 215 mg/dL; LDL: 135 mg/dL; HDL: 45 mg/dL). Physician concerned about possible sig- nificant CHD; referred her to local cardiovascular specialist. 9 minutes on Bruce protocol: 1.5 mm up-sloping ST depression in V ; normal echo images.
Clinical Studies: Cardiac catheterization: diffuse 40% disease in left circumflex and right coronary arteries; LAD 30% lesion. 0.68 LVEF.
Diagnosis: Asymptomatic coronary artery disease (CAD).
Impairment Rating: 1% to 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Mild atherosclerotic CAD according to catheterization and CT scan. Normal exercise tol- erance; no symptoms of angina or exertional dys- pnea. False-positive stress electrocardiogram result: no cardiac ischemia. Aggressive secondary prevention program (eg, smoking cessation, exer- cise counseling, and treatment of hyperlipidemia) could modify risk factors.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-10
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Coronary Heart Disease


Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Referred to a cardiologist because of abnor- mal exercise thallium stress test. Denied angina pectoris or dyspnea.
Current Symptoms: Plays golf and tennis regularly; states he has “endurance he had in college.” Nonsmoker; no history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or family history of CAD. Concerned because friend and fellow jurist died unexpectedly of a heart attack 2 months earlier. Wanted to know “definitively” if he had any significant CAD because he was then on a short list of possible Supreme Court Justice nominees.
Physical Exam: Normal, including BP and PR.
Clinical Studies: Exercise thallium: normal exercise tolerance (9.0 min, Bruce protocol); peak heart rate (HR): 180 BPM. Total cholesterol: 365 mg/dL; HDL: 45 mg/dL; triglycerides: 225 mg/dL; LDL cholesterol: 275 mg/dL. Catheterization: 50% lesions in proximal and distal LAD. RCA, LCx: scattered 20% and 30% luminal irregularities. 0.65 EF. ECG: Ischemic evidence at HR 170 (1.5 mm ST depression); image changes demonstrated ischemia in the distal anterior wall. Elevated lipids.
Diagnosis: Asymptomatic CAD with silent myocar- dial ischemia.
Impairment Rating: 5% to 9% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Changes on the exercise thallium stress test indicate a silent myocardial ischemia in a small area of the myocardium. No functional limi- tations; only mild CAD; could start treatment for hyperlipidemia. Medical therapy could reduce slightly increased risk of acute MI due to mild CAD and hyperlipidemia.
---END EXAMPLE---

work. Follows diet to maintain weight of 72 kg (160 lb)—11 kg (24 lb) less than 1 year before. Asymptomatic; no medication.
Clinical Studies: Chest roentgenograms: normal. ECG: Q and flat T waves in 2, 3, and F. During exercise, HR: 152 BPM; BP: adequate rise.
ECG: no pattern changes to indicate ischemia or arrhythmias.
Diagnosis: Recent inferior-wall MI.
Impairment Rating: 10% to 19% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Greater impairment for uncomplicated recovery from anterior wall infarction, especially if LV systolic dysfunction.
---END EXAMPLE---

Any of the exercise protocols in Table 3-2 may be used. The maximal and 90% of maximal predicted HR by age and sex group are presented in Table 3-7.


*Source: Sheffield LH. Exercise stress testing. In: Braunwald E, ed. Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1988:227.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-11

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-12
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Coronary Heart Disease


Subject: 52-year-old woman.
History: Service specialist for an insurance firm; coronary artery bypass surgery for angina relief 6 months earlier. Vein grafts in LAD, RCA. Preoperative coronary angiography: no signifi- cant obstruction in circumflex coronary artery; normal EF.
Current Symptoms: Did well postsurgery; worked for 14 months. Asymptomatic; avoids heavy physical exertion. Daily 0.3 g of aspirin; no other medications.
Physical Exam: Well-healed scar; normal heart.
Clinical Studies: Bruce protocol exercise test 10 days earlier; HR: 144 BPM; no ST-segment shifts or arrhythmias after 10 minutes of exercise. ECG: low T waves in I, L, V ,V , and V ; no Q waves.

10% to 29% Impairment Due to Coronary Heart Disease
Subject: 50-year-old man.
History: Service station attendant; acute MI 8 months earlier. Hospitalized for 10 days; serial ECGs: classic changes of an inferior wall infarc- tion. Post-MI echocardiography: inferior wall motion abnormalities; 0.55 EF.
Current Symptoms: After recovery, returned to

Chest roentgenogram: normal.
Diagnosis: CHD with coronary artery bypass surgery.
Impairment Rating: 10% to 19% impairment of the whole person.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-13
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Coronary Heart Disease

Subject: 48-year-old man.
History: Chest pain for 2 years interrupted his work- day. Pain accompanied by diaphoresis and dysp- nea. Slightly elevated cholesterol: 245 mg/dL. Family history: 66-year-old father with heart disease.
Current Symptoms: Chest pain; palpitations.
Physical Exam: BP: 140/90 mm Hg; PR: 76 BPM. Occasional ectopic beat; otherwise normal heart sounds.
Clinical Studies: Exercise stress test: completed 14 minutes on treadmill; maximum HR: 172; no evi- dence of ischemia. Because of the symptoms and the man’s persistence at asking for a second opin- ion, he was referred to a cardiologist. Cardiac catheterization: 40% stenosis in right coronary artery; no disease in the left system; 0.60 EF. Reassured that he did not have significant CAD, he returned to work. Symptoms persisted for another 6 months; mild palpitations began. Holter monitor: ST segment elevation during palpitation. Second cardiologist suspected coronary artery spasm because of the correlation between the symptoms and mental stress. Ergonovine testing: coronary spasm in the right coronary artery.
Diagnosis: Vasospastic angina pectoris; had coro- nary artery vasospasm and experienced symptoms only with significant mental stress.
Impairment Rating: 10% to 29% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Coronary artery spasm–related symp- toms and hyperlipidemia treatment possible with medication and psychological therapy to decrease stress. Although CAD not significantly obstruc- tive, angina pectoris limited work ability; at risk for ischemia-related complications. Impairment could be adjusted by controlling the vasospastic angina with medical treatment or stress reduction techniques. Greater impairment score if vasospas- tic angina nonresponsive, more frequent, and less reactive to stress.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-14
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Coronary Heart Disease


Subject: 58-year-old man.
History: First MI 6 months ago; multivessel PTCA.
Current Symptoms: Exertional angina while work- ing on industrial refrigeration equipment.
Discontinued exercise 2 weeks ago because of exertional dyspnea and angina. Symptoms develop after walking 1 mile in the morning before work. Beta-blocker and nitrate medications discontinued because he could not remember to take them.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: ECG: ST segment depression and T-wave inversion in lateral precordial leads.
Exercise thallium stress test: small area of apical ischemia at peak exercise workload of 6.8 METS. Cardiac catheterization: all previously treated blockages widely patent; no evidence of resteno- sis. 80% blockage in distal LAD too small to be treated with a percutaneous procedure. EF: 0.40; anterior wall motion abnormalities.
Diagnosis: Exertional angina pectoris secondary to CAD.
Impairment Rating: 30% to 35% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Recovered from MI; continued angina pectoris at moderately high workloads.
Medications would reduce or alleviate anginal symptoms and ischemia. Not a candidate for per- cutaneous or surgical revascularization because of the location and size of his one untreated coronary artery blockage.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-15
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Coronary Heart Disease

Subject: 62-year-old woman.
History: Quadruple coronary artery bypass surgery 13 months ago; experienced retrosternal chest dis- comfort during usual activities at a brisk pace.
Current Symptoms: Discomfort in the morning and outdoors in the cold. Enjoys walking, but usually experiences discomfort if she hurries up a steep hill going to church. Without rushing, she is asymptomatic, doing light household and other activities. On a diet; takes beta-adrenergic block- ing agent and oral nitrates.
Physical Exam: Comfortable; no signs of CHF. BP: 110/70 mm Hg; PR: regular—62 BPM.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-16
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Coronary Heart Disease


Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Physician; anterior wall MI 6 months ear- lier with angina pectoris, diaphoresis, and dysp- nea. ECG: new ST segment elevation in V through V ; elevated cardiac enzymes. Treated with thrombolytic and the usual adjunct medical therapies. Completed phase II cardiac rehabilita- tion, but never regained strength and stamina.
Dyspnea on exertion after 20 to 30 minutes’ brisk walk; unusually fatigued after each exercise ses- sion. Continued to practice medicine, but limited himself by not accepting any new patients.
6 weeks after hospital discharge, resting ECG:
105 BPM; < 1 mm ST elevation in V -V . Stress

3	6

Apical impulse: normal; no gallops or murmurs.
Clinical Studies: ECG: Low T waves in all leads. Chest roentgenogram: normal. After 6 minutes of exercise, HR: 118 BPM (ECG). During the last minute: retrosternal discomfort; 1 and 2 minutes afterward: 1.5 mm ST-segment depression in V - V . Coronary angiogram: 90% or greater obstruc- tion of all three native coronary arteries. Patent grafts to the right, circumflex, and left anterior descending coronary arteries; occluded graft to the diagonal branch of the LAD. EF: 0.50.
Diagnosis: CHD and continued angina after coro- nary artery bypass surgery.
Impairment Rating: 30% to 39% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Patent grafts to the major vessel territo- ries of the myocardium. Monitor for subsequent occlusion.
---END EXAMPLE---
echocardiogram: reduced exercise tolerance; com- pleted only 5.5 minutes on Bruce protocol. ECG with exercise: 4 mm of ST segment elevation.
Current Symptoms: Complained of exertional dyspnea after 20 minutes’ exercise and significant fatigue in office practice by early afternoon despite medication.
Physical Exam: BP: 98/60; PR: 68. No venous pres- sure elevation; large, sustained impulse above and lateral to the left nipple centered in the third inter- costal space at the anterior axillary line. S gallop.
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram: anteroapical LV aneurysm at rest; EF: 0.35; fell to 0.25 with
exercise. Cardiac catheterization: occluded proxi- mal LAD; no significant disease in LCx, RCA. Initially placed on an ACE inhibitor, nitrates, and low doses of furosemide and Coumadin. Low-salt diet. Beta-blocker 4 weeks later. ECG: 1-mm ST
segment elevation in V -V . Chest roentgenogram:

2	6
Cardiac enlargement; clear lung fields.
Diagnosis: Anterior LV aneurysm secondary to MI and CAD.
Impairment Rating: 45% to 49% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: LV aneurysm with secondary symptoms. Stable symptoms occurred with moderate activity. Maximal medical therapy. If symptoms worsen, future treatment includes aneurysm resection.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-17
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Coronary Heart Disease
Subject: 42-year-old man.
History: Inferior wall MI 2 years ago. Anteroseptal

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-18
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Coronary Heart Disease


Subject: 46-year-old woman.
History: Quadruple coronary artery bypass surgery 11 months earlier; daily pain, weakness, and breathlessness after minimal exertion.
Current Symptoms: Uses three pillows; awakes SOB; commonly sleeps sitting in a chair.
Symptoms continue despite digitalis, diuretics, nitrates, calcium-channel blocking agents, and hydralazine.
Physical Exam: Evidence of weight loss. Preferred sitting position. BP: 110/70 mm Hg; HR: 92 BPM. Distended neck veins with abdominal hand pressure, even when upper part of the examining table at 45°. Apical impulse: enlarged, sustained, and displaced to the anterior axillary line; parasternal heave. Rales at both lung bases; dull- ness at right lung base. S soft; prominent S . 2/6 holosystolic murmur at the apex.
Clinical Studies: ECG: QS in V -V ; prominent Q

MI 15 months ago.	1	4
waves in V and V ; low R waves throughout.
Current Symptoms: For past 6 months, almost	Inverted T waves in I, L, and V -V ; low else-
1	5

daily, 1- to 10-minute episode of retrosternal dis- comfort on minimal exertion and at rest, despite adequate doses of beta-adrenergic blocking agents, oral and sublingual nitrates, and a calcium-channel blocking agent.
Physical Exam: Comfortable at rest. BP: 120/80 mm Hg; PR: 54 BPM. No signs of CHF. Apical impulse: enlarged, sustained, and displaced later- ally to the anterior axillary line at the fifth inter- costal space. S soft; prominent S . 2/6 holosystolic murmur at apex.
Clinical Studies: ECG: Q waves in 2, 3, and F; QS pattern in V -V ; QR in V ; T waves low in all

where. Chest roentgenogram: marked car- diomegaly; increased vascular markings in upper lung fields; small, right-sided pleural effusion.
Coronary angiography: total occlusion of LAD; 90% blockage right and circumflex coronary arteries. Patent grafts to RCA and one circumflex artery branch; no visualization of grafts to other circumflex artery branch and anterior descending artery. Ventriculogram: 0.20 EF; akinesis of entire anterior wall; poor contraction elsewhere.
Diagnosis: Angina pectoris and LV failure after coronary artery bypass surgery.
Impairment Rating: 90% to 100% impairment of

1	3	4

leads. Chest roentgenogram: marked car- diomegaly; upper lung fields vasculature promi- nent. During and after 2 minutes of exercise, pain
and ST depression in I, L, V , and V . EF: fell

the whole person.
Comment: Unable to perform most activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---
5	6
from 0.30 to 0.25 (multigated blood pool scan).
Diagnosis: Angina pectoris and LV failure due to CHD.
Impairment Rating: 75% to 90% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Needs assistance for most activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---

3.4 Congenital Heart
	Disease
Recently, surgical procedures designed to correct or improve the circulation of infants and children with congenital cardiac disorders have allowed many of the children to live to adulthood. Many of these sur- gically treated patients continue to have less than normal functioning of the heart and circulation and are therefore impaired.11

Congenital heart disease may be recognized by med- ical history and physical examination, but often the exact diagnosis and the individual’s functional


impairment require special studies, including ECG, chest roentgenogram, radioisotope studies, echocar- diography, hemodynamic measurements, and angiography.12 The functional classification of car- diac disease found in Table 3-1 is used in the classifi- cation for congenital heart disease listed below in Table 3-8.


3.4 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Congenital Heart Disease
Impairment criteria for congenital heart disease are given in Table 3-8.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-20
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Congenital Heart Disease
Subject: 22-year-old woman.
History: Loud left sternal border systolic murmur since childhood. Cardiac catheterization at 2 and 18 years old—20 mm Hg gradient between right ventricle and PA. Normal PAP and cardiac output; no evidence of shunts or CV symptoms.
Physical Exam: Comfortable; no signs of HF or cyanosis. No precordium heaves, thrills, or taps.
normal; S widely split; varies with respiration.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-19
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Congenital Heart Disease

Subject: 25-year-old woman.
History: Repair of atrial septal defect 10 years ear- lier. No complications.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic and returned to an active life.
Physical Exam: Well-healed sternum wound with- out tenderness. No abnormal precordial pulsations or signs of CHF. S normal; S widely split; degree of splitting varies with respiration. No audible murmur.
Clinical Studies: ECG: incomplete right bundle- branch block pattern. Chest roentgenogram: nor- mal. Echocardiogram: mild RV enlargement; reduced ventricular septum motion. 2DE: no atrial level shunt. Doppler: no atrial level shunt; systolic PAP normal. Cardiac catheterization, angiogra- phy: normal.
Diagnosis: Atrial septal defect with surgical closure.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: If very small postoperative left-to-right shunt, or mildly elevated residual PAP, then prob- able impairment of 6% to 9%. Cardiac catheteri- zation, angiography unnecessary for evaluation.
---END EXAMPLE---
3/6 systolic murmur ends well short of S , loudest in second left intercostal space; early systolic click varies with respiration. No diastolic mur- murs or gallops.
Clinical Studies: Chest roentgenogram: normal.
ECG: normal.
Diagnosis: Mild pulmonary valve stenosis.
Impairment Rating: 9% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Higher estimate if gradient > 40 mm Hg (Doppler echocardiography) or if ECG showed RV hypertrophy and a suitable surgical candidate. If asymptomatic with a small ventricular septal defect, estimate at upper end of class 1; but if bac- terial endocarditis present, then estimate higher. If small atrial septal defect and normal pressures in all cardiac chambers and great vessels, or anom- alous venous return from small lung segment, also estimate at upper end of class 1.
---END EXAMPLE---

Comment: If shunt evidence, then impairment esti- mate higher. Also, if conduit or prosthesis in pul- monary outflow tract, or if significant symptoms, impairment estimate higher. Cardiac catheteriza- tion unnecessary for estimate.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-21
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Congenital Heart Disease
Subject: 42-year-old man.
History: Open-heart surgery for tetralogy of Fallot 15 years earlier. Procedure relieved pulmonary stenosis: pericardial patch placed in the right ven- tricular outflow tract (RVOT); ventricular septal defect closed.
Current Symptoms: Did well postoperatively with- out medication.
Physical Exam: Appeared healthy; BP: 110/70 mm Hg; PR: regular—70 BPM. No signs of CHF; precordium: normal. S : normal; S : louder than

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-22
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Congenital Heart Disease


Subject: 35-year-old woman.
History: Systolic murmur; abnormal cardiac sounds for many years. Led a relatively normal life; avoided participation in sports on the advice of physicians.
Current Symptoms: Weakness and fatigue with heavy exercise within last year, but still performs most daily activities without limitations.
Palpitations never sustained; not associated with inadequate cerebral perfusion. No history of cyanosis, breathlessness, or peripheral edema.
Physical Exam: Comfortable; no cyanosis. Elevated venous pressure 15 cm without large V waves; enlarged liver width of 12 cm. Clear lungs. No precordium thrills, taps, or heaves. S : loud, fol- lowed by a very loud, sharp sound in early systole heard best along the left sternal border. S : loud, early diastolic sound heard best at midpre- cordium. Holosystolic murmur along the left ster- nal border increased in intensity with inspiration.
Clinical Studies: ECG: right bundle-branch block pattern; very low R wave in V . Broad, notched P wave in leads III and F; inverted T waves in V and V . Occasional premature atrial beats. Chest roentgenogram: marked enlargement of cardiac

1	2

normal, followed by a mid-diastolic, scratchy murmur and a short, 2/6 ejection systolic murmur in the second and third left intercostal spaces.
Clinical Studies: ECG: right bundle-branch block. Chest roentgenogram: apical prominence left side of cardiac silhouette. Echocardiography: thicken- ing of RV wall; dilation of RV cavity with dimin- ished ventricular septal motion. Patent RVOT:
8-mm Hg gradient. Systolic RVP: 30 mm Hg. Doppler: no shunt.
Diagnosis: Tetralogy of Fallot with surgical relief of pulmonary valve stenosis and closure of the ven- tricular septal defect.
Impairment Rating: 15% to 20% impairment of the whole person.

silhouette, particularly to right of the sternum; normal pulmonary vasculature. Echocardiogram: features consistent with Ebstein’s anomaly of the tricuspid valve. Tricuspid valve: markedly displaced into a small RV; severe regurgitation.
Doppler: no right-to-left shunt. Cardiac catheteri- zation, angiography: mean right atrial pressure 7 mm Hg; V waves 15 mm Hg. RVP and PAP: nor- mal. No evidence of a shunt.
Diagnosis: Ebstein’s anomaly of the tricuspid valve.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person.


Comment: If right-to-left shunt, then estimate con- siderably higher. If symptomatic cardiac arrhyth- mia, then estimate impairment according to arrhythmia criteria and combine with congenital heart disease impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604). Cardiac catheterization unneces- sary for estimate. Exercise testing might be useful for determining functional class.
---END EXAMPLE---
Clinical Studies: ECG: right bundle-branch block; low R waves in V ; prominent P waves. Chest roentgenogram: greatly enlarged cardiac silhou- ette, especially right of the sternum. Pulmonary vasculature: normal. Echocardiogram: Ebstein’s anomaly of the tricuspid valve—typical changes. Doppler: small right-to-left shunt across atrial septum.
Diagnosis: Ebstein’s anomaly of the tricuspid valve.
Impairment Rating: 40% to 49% impairment of the whole person.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-24
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Congenital Heart Disease


Subject: 20-year-old man.
History: Blalock-Hanlon procedure in infancy.
Mustard procedure for transposition of the great vessels 10 years ago. Did moderately well except for reduced stamina: tired easily and was unable to participate in such activities as tennis and hiking.
Physical Exam: Appeared healthy with no cyanosis; underweight. Neck veins distended; prominent A wave. No liver enlargement or peripheral edema. Clear lungs. Parasternal and apical heaves at pre- cordium. Holosystolic murmur at left sternal bor-

der; S present.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-23
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Congenital Heart Disease
Subject: 52-year-old woman.
History: Ebstein’s anomaly of the tricuspid valve years ago. (Diagnosis made with echocardiogra- phy, cardiac catheterization, and angiography.) For several years, breathlessness increased during daily activities such as climbing stairs, mopping, or cleaning. Also complained of ankle edema and increased abdominal girth.
Current Symptoms: Diuretics diminished edema and ascites; salt restriction; takes digitalis.
Physical Exam: Appeared well; lips, fingernails appeared dusky. Markedly distended neck veins; slightly pulsatile, 14-cm-wide liver. Clear lungs. Precordium: active parasternal area; no heave. S : loud, followed by loud, early systolic sound along left sternal border; S : widely split, followed by early diastolic sound. Holosystolic murmur increased with inspiration, heard best left of the sternum. Diastolic murmur heard best during inspiration and along the left sternal border.

Clinical Studies: ECG: tall R-wave voltage in all precordial leads. Chest roentgenogram: moderate cardiomegaly. Echocardiogram: properly func- tioning intra-atrial baffle. Enlarged ventricular cavities; good ventricular function. Cardiac catheterization, angiography: elevated right mean atrial pressure 12 mm Hg; A waves 20 mm Hg. Systolic RVP and PAP: 30 to 35 mm Hg.
Diagnosis: Transposition of the great vessels and Mustard procedure.
Impairment Rating: 40% to 49% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: If significant arrhythmias complicated postoperative period, estimate according to the arrhythmia criteria and combine with congenital heart disease criteria (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment from cardiac disease.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-25
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Congenital Heart Disease

Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: Tetralogy of Fallot since childhood; Blalock-Taussig systemic to PA anastomosis lig- ated during a second operation years later. Muscle in the RVOT area removed to relieve pulmonary stenosis; ventricular septal defect closed. Did not do well after second operation—continued to tire easily. Significant peripheral edema and ascites responded to diuretics.
Current Symptoms: Comfortable during exertion for short periods; weak and breathless on more moderate exertion.
Physical Exam: Prominent V wave in neck veins. Liver 14 cm across. Palpable parasternal cardiac activity; no sustained heave. 3/6 holosystolic mur- mur along left sternal border; mid-diastolic mur- mur in the second left intercostal space. S :

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-26
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Congenital Heart Disease


Subject: 23-year-old woman.
History: Eisenmenger’s complex 10 years ago; regu- lar follow-up visits. Cardiac catheterization, angiography: ventricular septal defect; pulmonary vascular resistance equal to systemic vascular resistance.
Current Symptoms: Recent activity markedly lim- ited because of fatigue on minimal exertion.
Recent peripheral edema responded to diuretics.
Physical Exam: Mild cyanosis intensified with exer- tion. Neck veins: prominent A waves; no jugular venous distention when placed at 45° angle. No enlargement or peripheral edema. Clear lungs.
Forceful, sustained, parasternal heave. S : normal; S : narrowly split, marked increase in second component. Short, early systolic ejection murmur along left sternal border.
Clinical Studies: ECG: RV hypertrophy, peaked P waves in leads II, III, and F. Chest roentgenogram: RV hypertrophy; marked prominence of proximal portion of PA; greatly diminished pulmonary vas- cular markings in peripheral lung fields.
Diagnosis: Eisenmenger’s complex with ventricular septal defect and elevated pulmonary vascular resistance.
Impairment Rating: 95% to 100% impairment of the whole person.

normal; S : single and loud.
Clinical Studies: ECG: right bundle-branch block. Chest roentgenogram: cardiomegaly and right pleural effusion. Echocardiogram: dilated, poorly functioning RV with severe tricuspid regurgitation. No residual RVOT obstruction. 2DE, Doppler: no residual ventricular septal defect.
Diagnosis: Tetralogy of Fallot with surgical relief of the pulmonary stenosis and closure of the ventric- ular septal defect, followed by development of tri- cuspid regurgitation and heart failure.
Impairment Rating: 80% to 90% impairment of the whole person.


3.5  Cardiomyopathies
Cardiomyopathies, caused by a primary disease that affects the heart muscle, lead to impairment from abnormal ventricular function. Abnormal ventricular function may be the result of (1) systolic dysfunc- tion, (2) diastolic dysfunction, or (3) a combination of both. An individual with these abnormalities may be asymptomatic or symptomatic due to pulmonary or systemic organ congestion and decreased cardiac output. In people with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, a dynamic outflow tract obstruction and secondary mitral regurgitation may cause symptoms of exer- tional dyspnea, angina, and syncope. Because some cardiomyopathies are reversible, every effort should be made to identify the reversible forms and to treat

them appropriately and prevent further deterioration. When the conditions are stable, the individual may be evaluated in terms of permanent impairment.13-18

Cardiomyopathies arise from many mechanisms, but the conditions may be divided into three major types:
(1) dilated or congestive, (2) hypertrophic, and
(3) restrictive. Careful history-taking and physical examination can reveal cardiomyopathies, but it is appropriate to confirm the diagnosis with echocar- diography and selected laboratory studies.


3.5 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Cardiomyopathies Impairment criteria for cardiomyopathies are given in Table 3-9.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-27
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Cardiomyopathy

Subject: 31-year-old man.
History: Admitted to hospital following syncope attack at detoxification center. Admitted to “a problem with alcohol”; refused chemical depend- ency treatment.
Current Symptoms: Denies exertional dyspnea, fatigue, angina, nocturnal dyspnea, and any his- tory of syncope.
Physical Exam: Vital signs: normal; CV exam: normal.
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram: 0.40 LVEF; mild global hypokinesis of all LV wall segments.
Normal atrial dimensions and function, right heart size, function, and estimated PAP. Overnight telemetry monitoring: no arrhythmias to explain syncope.
Diagnosis: Syncope secondary to alcohol intoxica- tion and asymptomatic LV dysfunction, presum- ably due to alcoholic cardiomyopathy.
Impairment Rating: 5% to 9% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Evaluated for reversible causes.
Impairment higher if symptomatic or condition limits daily activities.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-28
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Cardiomyopathy


Subject: 26-year-old woman.
History: Signs of pulmonary congestion 3 days post- partum; normal birth. Normotensive; no evidence of valvular heart disease. ECG: within normal lim- its except for sinus tachycardia. Echocardiogram: showed diffuse global hypokinesis; 0.30 EF. Successfully treated with digitalis and diuretics.
Digitalis and diuretics discontinued 6 months before evaluation. Advised to avoid subsequent pregnancies; otherwise able to do all activities of daily living.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic for several months; resumed full activities.
Physical Exam: No CHF signs. BP: 110/70 mm Hg; PR: regular—70 BPM. Precordium quiet; no ven- tricular heaves. Heart sounds: normal.
Clinical Studies: ECG: normal. Chest roentgenogram: slight cardiomegaly; no chamber enlargement.
Echocardiogram: slightly enlarged; mild global hypokinesis; 0.55 EF. Upon exercise, achieved 95% of functional aerobic capacity with ECG changes; EF fell to 0.50.
Diagnosis: Postpartum cardiomyopathy.
Impairment Rating: 9% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: If symptomatic, then estimate greater impairment. If normal heart size and EF normal at rest and increased on exercise, then estimate < 9%.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-29
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Cardiomyopathy

Subject: 28-year-old man.
History: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with outflow obstruction. Septal myectomy 2 years ago for severe exertional dyspnea and lighthead- edness. Individual’s father had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Current Symptoms: Active lifestyle; no further symptoms.
Physical Exam: Appeared healthy; no evidence of CHF. BP: 130/70 mm Hg; PR: regular—70 BPM. Brisk carotid pulses; sustained apical impulse.
Soft 1/6 midsystolic murmur heard best along left sternal border; S gallop.
Clinical Studies: ECG: prominent Q waves; high voltage. Chest roentgenogram: heart size normal. Echocardiogram: marked thickening of ventricular septum; some thickening of posterior ventricular wall. Mitral valve motion normal; 0.80 EF. Mild systolic anterior motion of mitral valve. Doppler: minimal 10-mm Hg gradient across the LVOT.
48-hour Holter monitor: no evidence of VT.
Diagnosis: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy post–septal myectomy.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Asymptomatic after successful myec- tomy; advised avoidance of strenuous physical exertion and importance of follow-up evaluation. If significant VT Holter, antiarrhythmic therapy possibly indicated. Impairment then estimated according to combined percentages from arrhyth- mia and cardiomyopathy criteria of impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-30
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Cardiomyopathy


Subject: 59-year-old man.
History: Greenskeeper on a golf course; long- standing, excessive alcohol use; nutritional defi- ciencies. Hospitalized previously with severe pul- monary congestion probably due to LV failure due to combination of excessive alcohol intake and poor nutrition.
Current Symptoms: Condition responded promptly to nutritional treatment, digitalis, diuretics, and ACE inhibitors. Avoided alcohol; returned to most activities. Regularly visited physician; continued ACE inhibitors and moderate salt restriction.
Physical Exam: Appeared comfortable; no signs of CHF. BP: 120/80 mm Hg; PR: regular—70 BPM. Precordium apical impulse larger than normal, slightly sustained, and displaced to anterior axil- lary line. No parasternal heave. S , S : normal.
No S .
Clinical Studies: ECG: Small R waves, low T waves in lateral chest leads. Chest roentgenogram: mod- erate cardiomegaly; no specific chamber enlarge- ment. Echocardiogram: 0.40 EF at rest and after exercise. Achieved 75% of functional aerobic capacity on exercise testing. No ECG changes dur- ing exercise.
Diagnosis: Cardiomyopathy, probably alcoholic and nutritional.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-31
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Cardiomyopathy
Subject: 38-year-old man.
History: 3-month exertional dyspnea. HIV-positive for 5 years. Treatment with ace inhibitor; still experienced dyspnea (functional class II).
Current Symptoms: Stopped jogging after two blocks because of dyspnea. Denied cough, fever, chills, edema, orthopnea, and paroxysmal noctur- nal dyspnea.
Physical Exam: BP: 130/80 mm Hg; PR: normal— 88 BPM. Normal jugular venous pressure; clear lungs. Cardiac examination: soft S ; normal S ; no

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-32
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Cardiomyopathy


Subject: 54-year-old woman.
History: Treated for symptoms of CHF and inade- quate cardiac output for past 3 years. Cardiac catheterization and cineangiography 2 years ago; no evidence of coronary artery or valvular dis- ease. Depressed ventricular function; elevated end-diastolic pressure 28 mm Hg; 0.30 EF. Subsequently treated with ACE inhibitors.
Current Symptoms: Condition stable for past year; able to do light housework and sedentary work. Breathlessness upon climbing a flight of stairs; prefers two pillows.
Physical Exam: BP: 110/70 mm Hg; PR: regular— 70 BPM. Venous pressure normal; clear lungs.
Apical impulse markedly enlarged, sustained, dis- placed laterally to anterior axillary line. Early diastolic impulse palpable after systolic impulse. Diminished S ; normal S ; prominent S .
Clinical Studies: ECG: low T waves in all leads. QS pattern in V , V . Chest roentgenogram: marked cardiomegaly; some distention of pulmonary ves- sels in upper lobes. Echocardiogram: LV: moder- ately dilated; LVEF 0.30; enlarged LA.

1	2

gallops or murmurs. Remainder of examination normal.
Clinical Studies: Chest roentgenogram: mild pul- monary congestion; suggested cardiomegaly. Stress testing: exercise tolerance of 3.8 minutes with development of 1 mm ST depression.
Echocardiogram: reduced systolic function;
0.30 EF; mild LV enlargement. Mild (grade 1?4) mitral regurgitation. Cardiac catheterization: noncritical CAD. Cardiac biopsy: no infiltrative cardiomyopathy.
Diagnosis: HIV cardiomyopathy.
Impairment Rating: 40% to 49% impairment due to cardiomyopathy; combine with HIV impair- ment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Significantly reduced exercise capacity; poor LV function. Concurrent cardiac disorders excluded for medical therapy. No cardiac surgery since no significant CAD or severe valvular disease.
---END EXAMPLE---
Diagnosis: Idiopathic cardiomyopathy.
Impairment Rating: 49% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Reduced exercise capacity; poor LV function.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-33
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Cardiomyopathy

Subject: 62-year-old woman.
History: Increasing dyspnea and chest pressure with exertion for 2 years. Long-standing, poorly treated hypertension; no other medical problems. Heart murmur, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; treated with large dosages of beta-blocker and calcium channel-blocker.
Current Symptoms: Still severely limited by symp- toms; unable to walk up a half flight of stairs or do daily activities. Although dual-chamber pace- maker placed 6 months earlier, minimal change in symptoms.
Physical Exam: BP: 150/90 mm Hg; HR: 50 BPM. Venous pressure: normal; carotid brisk with bifid quality. LV impulse: sustained with a triple impulse.
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram: severe septal hypertrophy; 0.70 EF; 70 mm Hg outflow tract obstruction. Severe mitral regurgitation secondary to systolic anterior motion of mitral valve. Chest roentgenogram: cardiomegaly with clear fields.
ECG: sinus bradycardia with paced rhythm.
Diagnosis: Severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with outflow obstruction.
Impairment Rating: 70% to 79% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Typical symptoms of hypertrophic car- diomyopathy related to outflow tract obstruction and diastolic dysfunction. No typical findings of “backward” HF present in individuals with dilated cardiomyopathies. If successful septal myectomy, then improved symptoms and classification.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-34
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Cardiomyopathy


Subject: 47-year-old man.
History: 3 months ago developed exertional dysp- nea, orthopnea, and edema.
Current Symptoms: Evaluation for cardiac trans- plantation: dyspnea on exertion with one flight of stairs or ambulating > 25 feet. Meds: ACE inhibitor, diuretics, and beta-blocker. Unable to do many activities of daily living.
Physical Exam: Elevated venous pressures and rales in both lung fields. Cardiac examination: laterally displaced, sustained apical impulse; 2/6 apical holosystolic murmur. No peripheral edema.
Clinical Studies: ECG: normal sinus rhythm—90 BPM; low amplitude QRS complex throughout all leads. QS complexes present in II, III, and aVF. Chest roentgenogram: moderate cardiomegaly; mild pulmonary venous hypertension. Reduced LV function (0.32 EF) secondary to cardiac amy- loidosis.
Diagnosis: Cardiac amyloidosis with CHF.
Impairment Rating: 80% to 89% impairment due to cardiomyopathy; combine with impairment due to organ system effects of amyloidosis (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Level of impairment higher if more severe symptoms (dyspnea with minimal exertion, peripheral edema), history of syncope, or evi- dence of nonsustained ventricular tachyarrhyth- mias. Physical findings of HF despite medical therapy. If significant arrhythmias develop, evaluate according to arrhythmia criteria (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
---END EXAMPLE---

3.6 Pericardial Heart
	Disease
Inflammation from diseases of the pericardium is associated with (1) systemic illnesses such as lupus erythematosus; (2) a reaction to mechanical forces, such as trauma or irradiation; (3) no obvious cause (idiopathic pericarditis); (4) infections, eg, viral, bac- terial, fungal; or (5) open heart surgery (postcar- diotomy syndrome). The pericardium may also be affected by tumors.

Recurrent pericarditis can lead to disabling episodes of fevers and pleuritic chest pain. Since chest pain is nonspecific, pericarditis evidence must be docu- mented by echocardiography to show a pericardial effusion or by laboratory evidence of active inflam- mation, such as an increase in the erythrocyte sedi- mentation rate (ESR).

Constrictive pericarditis is the most common pericar- dial disorder leading to permanent impairment; surgi- cal removal of the thickened pericardium may significantly reduce symptoms and improve the over- all condition of the individual. Before assessing per- manent impairment, it is mandatory to allow sufficient time for the person to recover from a surgical proce- dure and to reach maximal medical improvement.


Pain and compromised cardiac function because of tamponade may cause some impairment, but they are rare as causes of permanent impairment. Recurrent episodes of pericarditis with tamponade or pericar- dial disease related to tumors may lead to permanent impairment. Allow adequate time for resolution of an acute illness, generally a period of months, before assessing permanent impairment.

Diagnosis of pericardial disease is made by history- taking; identifying a pericardial fraction rub or early diastolic pericardial knock; demonstrating pericar- dial effusion, thickening, or calcification on an echocardiogram; showing a thickened pericardium with computerized tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); or findings at cardiac catheterization.


3.6 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Pericardial Heart Disease
Criteria for evaluating permanent impairment related to pericardial heart disease are given in Table 3-10.


Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Self-limited illness; no effects on activi- ties of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-35
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Pericardial Heart Disease
Subject: 28-year-old man.
History: Acute pericarditis 15 months ago.
Symptoms: acute, self-limited, febrile illness, with anterior chest pain and a pericardial friction rub.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic; returned to work and leading a normal life.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram: small pericardial effusion. Illness resolved with aspirin treatment.
Diagnosis: Acute benign idiopathic pericarditis.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Could develop constrictive pericarditis, but most individuals have no permanent impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-36
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Pericardial Heart Disease
Subject: 64-year-old woman.
History: Had successful pericardiocentesis for idio- pathic pericardial effusion. Moderate symptoms resolved after treatment.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic from rigorous traveling to South America.
Physical Examination: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Chest roentgenogram: normal.
Echocardiogram: normal.
Diagnosis: Resolved pericardial effusion following percutaneous pericardiocentesis with no recurrence.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-37
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Pericardial Heart Disease


Subject: 32-year-old woman.
History: Viral pericarditis with fever and pleuritic pain 1 year ago. Echocardiogram: moderate-sized, circumferential, pericardial effusion, an elevated ESR and white blood cell count; no evidence of bacterial or fungal infection. Pericardial tap: no bacteria. Autoimmune workup: negative.
Current Symptoms: For past year, several recur- rences of chest pain with effusions; unable to carry out daily activities. Treated with NSAIDs for 4-6 weeks each time. Condition stable for about 10 months.
Physical Exam: Comfortable; no signs or symptoms of CHF. Heart sounds normal; no murmurs or extra heart sounds. No audible pericardial rub.
Clinical Studies: ECG: flat T-wave abnormalities. Chest roentgenogram: normal size heart; clear lung fields. Echocardiogram: small residual pericar- dial effusion.
Diagnosis: Recurrent idiopathic pericarditis.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: If episodes more frequent, then consider long-term medication (eg, salicylates, NSAIDs, steroids, or colchicine).
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-38
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Pericardial Heart Disease

Subject: 60-year-old man.
History: Pericardiectomy for constrictive pericardi- tis 1 year ago.
Current Symptoms: No symptoms even with sig- nificant exertion. Denied peripheral edema, orthopnea, exertional dyspnea, or early satiety.
Physical Exam: BP: normal; no pulsus paradoxicus; normal CV examination and laboratory work.
Clinical Studies: Chest roentgenogram: small area of pericardial calcification appeared where peri- cardium incompletely stripped during surgery. Echocardiogram: mild LV enlargement; 0.50 EF; inspiratory changes in mitral inflow amplitude; early diastolic filling wave consistent with con- strictive physiology.
Diagnosis: LV enlargement and constrictive peri- carditis following surgical pericardectomy.
Impairment Rating: 20% to 29% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Mild LV enlargement; persistent con- strictive physiology following surgical pericardec- tomy. Level of impairment higher if any symptoms.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-39
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Pericardial Heart Disease

Subject: 45-year-old man.
History: Pericardiectomy for constrictive pericardi- tis 10 years earlier. Daily furosemide to prevent lower extremity edema.

Current Symptoms: Weakness and breathlessness with heavy physical exertion; works regularly.
Physical Exam: Venous pressure mildly elevated: 12 cm H O; no edema. BP and PR: normal. No ventricular heaves or thrills. S : normal; S : diminished. No extra sounds or rubs.
Clinical Studies: ECG: low-voltage QRS; T waves in all leads. Chest roentgenogram: considerable cardiomegaly; some calcification at posterior aspect of heart. Clear lung fields. Echocardiogram: pericardium thickening; moderate diminution of RV, LV contraction; 0.40 LVEF. Doppler: evidence of residual pericardial restraint. Mitral inflow; early diastolic filling wave amplitude demon- strated 50% variation with inspiration.
Diagnosis: Constrictive pericarditis with pericardiec- tomy.
Impairment Rating: 30% to 39% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: After pericardiectomy, possible residual elevation of venous pressure. If more activities limited, then level of impairment > 30% to 39%.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-40
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Pericardial Heart Disease


Subject: 48-year-old woman.
History: Tuberculosis after assignment in Central Africa. Developed intermittent pericardial effu- sions. Two to three dyspnea episodes and lower extremity edema annually. Pericardiocentesis for fluid removal. No chest pain. Refused surgical pericardiectomy; father died during similar procedure.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic since prior episode 3 months earlier.
Physical Exam: Currently normal.
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram: thickened peri- cardium, constrictive physiology during asympto- matic periods; effusive constrictive physiology during symptomatic periods. Medications did not suppress symptoms.
Diagnosis: Recurrent pericarditis with symptomatic effusions.
Impairment Rating: 30% to 49% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Recurrent pericardial effusions despite aggressive treatment. Impairment higher if symp- toms more frequent or if LV dysfunction evident.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-41
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Pericardial Heart Disease

Subject: 62-year-old man.
History: Profound ascites, peripheral edema, weight loss, signs of pulmonary congestion attributed to a pericardial effusion. Effusion drained, temporarily relieved severe ascites and peripheral edema.
Fatigue and breathlessness continue with ordinary activity; unable to climb one flight of stairs with- out resting.
Current Symptoms: Edema, ascites returned. Able to walk on a level surface and do light activities of daily living.
Physical Exam: Comfortable. Neck veins elevated 20 cm H O; 2+ peripheral edema and ascites.
Evidence of marked weight loss remained. No ventricular heaves, thrills, or taps in the pre- cordium. Diminished heart sounds; no murmurs or extra sounds.
Clinical Studies: ECG: low voltage of the QRS and T waves. Chest roentgenogram: marked car- diomegaly; some upper lobe pulmonary vascula- ture distention. Echocardiogram: systolic ventricular function: normal; 0.55 LVEF. Doppler: constrictive pericarditis.
Diagnosis: Constrictive pericarditis following peri- cardial drainage.
Impairment Rating: 80% to 89% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Drainage of pericardial effusion may cause limitations from residual constrictive peri- carditis. If symptoms with minimal daily activi- ties, or if signs of overt congestion at evaluation, then impairment possibly as high as 95% to 100% (total impairment). Complete pericardiectomy may result in symptom and class improvement.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-42
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Pericardial Heart Disease

Subject: 47-year-old woman.
History: Pericardiectomy for constrictive pericardi- tis 2 years ago. Continued dyspnea with minimal activities; dependent on others for self-care. Daily furosemide (160 mg twice a day), digitalis, and nitrates. Compression stockings caused sympto- matic improvement.
Current Symptoms: Waking at night with breath- lessness.
Physical Exam: BP: 115/80 mm Hg; fell to 85/45 mm Hg with inspiration. Neck veins elevated; did not fall with inspiration. Clear lung fields; distant heart sounds; audible S . Abdomen: moderate ascites and hepatomegaly. 2+ pitting edema in lower extremities and lower back region.
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram: enlarged heart with reduced function; 0.30 EF. Constrictive physiology. No pericardial effusion. Laboratory studies: mild anemia; liver enzymes elevation consistent with congestive hepatomegaly.
Diagnosis: Constrictive pericarditis following surgi- cal pericardiectomy and biventricular dysfunction with HF.
Impairment Rating: 90% to 100% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Class IV symptoms; terminal prognosis.
---END EXAMPLE---

3.7  Arrhythmias
An arrhythmia is one or more heartbeats generated at a site other than the sinus node. An impulse gener- ated in the sinus node but not transmitted normally through the conducting system is a conduction defect arrhythmia. Arrhythmias may occur in individuals with structurally and functionally normal hearts or in those with any type of organic heart disease.

Because arrhythmias tend to fluctuate remarkably in frequency, the physician must adequately document and estimate the frequency with which an arrhythmia occurs. The associated symptoms can include syn- cope, weakness and fatigue, palpitations, dizziness, lightheadedness, chest heaviness, and shortness of breath, alone or in any combination.


The degree of impairment from cardiac arrhythmias often has to be combined with the degree of impair- ment due to underlying heart disease and then calculated according to the Combined Values Chart (p. 604). Before estimating the degree of permanent impairment, allow adequate time for the individual’s condition to reach maximal medical improvement after instituting therapy.19


3.7 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Arrhythmias Criteria for evaluating impairments related to arrhythmias are given in Table 3-11.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-43
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Arrhythmias
Subject: 56-year-old man.
History: Frequent premature beats during annual physical examination.
Current Symptoms: None. Able to perform all activities of daily living.
Physical Exam: Remainder of exam normal.
Clinical Studies: ECG: frequent premature complexes.
Diagnosis: Atrial premature complexes.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-44
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Arrhythmias
Subject: 21-year-old woman.
History: Syncopal spell while studying for final exam. Gastrointestinal illness for 3 days before episode. ER evaluation. HR: 110 BPM; BP with orthostatic drop: 110/65 mm Hg supine to 85/40 mm Hg standing, with presyncope. Didn’t follow up for 3 months; no subsequent episodes.
Physical Exam: Normal now.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Orthostatic hypotension with vasovagal syncope.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Isolated episode of dehydration-related syncope. No further evaluation necessary.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-45
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Arrhythmias


Subject: 62-year-old man.
History: 1-year history of atrial fibrillation with irregular ventricular response 75 BPM.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic.
Physical Exam: PR: 75 BPM.
Clinical Studies: ECG, chest roentgenogram, and echocardiogram: normal.
Diagnosis: Atrial fibrillation with controlled ventric- ular response.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: If medications needed to maintain ven- tricular response, then impairment estimate slightly higher.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-46
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Arrhythmias


Subject: 52-year-old man.
History: Recurring syncope 8 months ago; treated with insertion of a permanent pacemaker for com- plete heart block.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic.
Physical Exam: Appeared well. BP: 120/80 mm Hg; PR: 72 BPM. Normal heart sounds; no murmurs.
Clinical Studies: ECG: complete capture of the heart by artificial pacemaker at 72 BPM. Pacemaker sensed and properly inhibited rare pre- mature ventricular beat.


Diagnosis: Adams-Stokes attacks in individual with complete heart block; managed with properly functioning artificial pacemaker.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-47
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Arrhythmias

Subject: 44-year-old man.
History: Multiple, recurrent, 5- to 15-minute episodes of rapid heart rate accompanied by light- headedness. Vagal-type maneuvers occasionally terminated episodes; spontaneous termination. No frank syncope. Occasional episode with verapamil LA 240 mg a day. Symptom free with verapamil LA 360 mg a day. Regimen continued for 13 months when impairment evaluated.
Current Symptoms: Episodes of rapid heart rate. Episodes cause weakness and prohibit any physi- cal activity.
Physical Exam: PR: regular—86 BPM.
Clinical Studies: ECG: Holter monitoring: atrial tachycardia: 155 BPM during episode. Typical patterns of reentry atrioventricular (AV) nodal tachycardia.
Diagnosis: AV nodal reentry tachycardia with atrial tachycardia, adequately controlled by calcium- channel blocker.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: If palpitations continued with medica- tions, or if rare episode associated with inade- quate cerebral perfusion, then estimated impairment possibly as high as 49%.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-48
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Arrhythmias


Subject: 58-year-old man.
History: Asymptomatic LV dysfunction; out-of- hospital cardiac arrest 3 months ago. Returned for evaluation of implanted pacemaker-cardioverter- defibrillator. No syncope; five instances of pro- found palpitations followed by internal firing of the cardioverter-defibrillator system 45 seconds after symptom onset.
Current Symptoms: Internal shocks were “mildly disconcerting” at best. No HF or angina symptoms.
Physical Exam: PR: 80 BPM, normal pacing.
Clinical Studies: Pacemaker-cardioverter-defibrilla- tor working well.
Diagnosis: Sustained VT.
Impairment Rating: 40% to 49% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Infrequent discharges of internal defibril- lator system in response to sustained VT. Leads somewhat active life; higher impairment if (a) shocks occurring weekly or more frequently, (b) LV dysfunction symptoms, or (c) episodes include syncope.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-49
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Arrhythmias

Subject: 38-year-old woman.
History: Rapid heart action episodes for over 10 years with retrosternal pressure, fainting sensa- tion, and general weakness. Several spells of unconsciousness, during which husband used CPR. Tachyarrhythmia ended spontaneously within 30 minutes; no external electrical conver- sion necessary. Many antiarrhythmic medications for past 5 months (ie, quinidine sulfate, 300 mg every 6 h; procainamide, 750 mg every 4 h; and propranolol, 160 mg twice daily) controlled arrhythmia fairly well. Previous verapamil use failed to prevent arrhythmia.
Current Symptoms: Episodes continue monthly, none associated with loss of consciousness.
Occasional swelling of small joints in the hands respond to low corticosteroid doses.
Physical Exam: Cardiovascular: no evidence of valvular or myocardial disease.
Clinical Studies: Serologic abnormalities character- istic of systemic lupus erythematosis (SLE). ECG: normal pattern and rhythm; ECG during palpita- tions: rapid regular rhythm 200-250 BPM. Electrophysiologic studies: no abnormal conduc- tion problems. VT easily induced; pattern similar to one during spontaneous episode.
Diagnosis: Recurrent VT.
Impairment Rating: 70% to 90% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Impairment depends on frequency and symptomatic nature of episodes.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 3-50
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Arrhythmias


Subject: 42-year-old man.
History: Medications, pacemaker for syncope for past 8 years. Syncope continued daily without warning despite all efforts. Work limited; unable to conduct business meetings because of embar- rassment about syncope unpredictability. Could not legally drive an automobile or use any power equipment that might endanger his safety if spell occurred.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram, exercise stress test: heart within normal limits.
Diagnosis: Recurrent syncope despite maximal therapy.
Impairment Rating: 75% to 90% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Daily syncope with maximal therapy.
---END EXAMPLE---

3.8 Cardiovascular Impairment Evaluation
	Summary
See Table 3-12 for an evaluation summary for the assessment of cardiovascular impairment.






================================================================================
Chapter 4: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Cardiovascular System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries
4.1 Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease
4.2 Diseases of the Aorta
4.3 Vascular Diseases Affecting the Extremities
4.4 Diseases of the Pulmonary Arteries
4.5 Cardiovascular Impairment Evaluation Summary
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating perma- nent impairments of the systemic and pulmonary arteries as they affect an individual’s ability to function and perform activities of daily living. The information regarding medical evaluation, analysis of findings, and impairment criteria in Chapter 3, The Cardiovascular System: Heart and Aorta, remain applicable for this chapter. See Table 3-1 for the functional classification of cardiac disease.

This chapter also integrates new findings in the rapidly changing specialty of cardiovascular disease. The following areas are new or revised from the fourth edition: (a) the addition of recent guidelines of the sixth report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC-6)1; (b) an expanded section on pulmonary hypertension that outlines guides for impairment assessment; and (c) the latest data for prognosis of individuals with pulmonary hypertension.


65


4.1 Hypertensive Cardiovascular
	Disease
The JNC-6 classifies hypertension, or elevated blood pressure, as an elevation of the systolic blood pres- sure to ? 140 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure to
>89 mm Hg on two or more separate readings.1 (See Table 4-1 for the JNC-6 three-stage hypertension classification.) Hypertension, the leading cause of ambulatory office visits in the United States, can pro- duce heart disease, stroke, and renal failure. The eco- nomic impact of heart disease and stroke exceeds
$29 billion annually in the United States. The preva- lence of hypertension and its complications make it a major public health concern, particularly in the Southeast and among African Americans.2,3


1 Adapted from the sixth report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. Arch Intern Med. 1997;157:2413-2446.


Hypertensive heart disease includes hypertension, hypertension-associated systolic and diastolic heart failure (HF), hypertension-associated angina, and hypertension-induced left ventricular (LV)
hypertrophy. Hypertensive heart disease can be very debilitating and demands aggressive treatment.
Preventive treatment strategies may reduce the risk of developing secondary cardiac changes, the symp- toms associated with hypertension, and other organ dysfunction.4-7


4.1 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease
Table 4-2 addresses the impairment classification for hypertensive cardiovascular disease. Cardiovascular complications of hypertension should be established before assigning a diagnosis of hypertensive cardio- vascular disease. Because patients with hypertensive cardiovascular disease do not become symptomatic until the very late stages, the impairment classifica- tion requires information on the end-organ damage that may occur even in the absence of symptoms.


Diagnosis: Essential hypertension.
Impairment Rating: 1% to 3% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Mild hypertension; check BP after medication.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-1
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease
Subject: 55-year-old woman.
History: Essential hypertension 5 years ago. Medication: angiotensin II antagonist and diuretic. Normal BP readings prior to visit.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic; denies medica- tion side effects.
Physical Exam: Normal; BP: 105/78 mm Hg.
Clinical Studies: ECG: normal.
Diagnosis: Essential hypertension with adequate control.
Impairment Rating: 0% to 3% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Continue medication. Impairment based on hypertension pathological changes, medication needs, and impact on activities of daily living. If medication needs change, then reassess rating.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-2
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease
Subject: 26-year-old man.
History: Hypertensive since 18; causative factors unknown. Asymptomatic; elevated blood pressure (BP) despite salt restriction, weight control, and regular exercise. Antihypertensive prescribed.
Current Symptoms: Discontinued medication last year; seeking consultation.
Physical Exam: Sitting BP: 160/95 mm Hg in each arm, 160/95 mm Hg in right leg. Good-quality arterial pulses. Same BP 1 week later. All other findings normal.
Clinical Studies: ECG: normal. Chest roentgenogram: normal. Serum electrolyte levels (BUN, serum creatinine) and urinalysis: normal.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-3
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease

Subject: 44-year-old man.
History: Obstructive sleep apnea, hypertension; beta- blockers, diuretics, and ACE inhibitor.
Current Symptoms: Mild exertional dyspnea while jogging.
Physical Exam: BP: 145/90 mm Hg. Otherwise within normal limits. Mild silver arteriole wiring.
Clinical Studies: Electrolytes: normal.
Diagnosis: Essential hypertension resistant to treat- ment with persistent stage I hypertension.
Impairment Rating: 10% to 15% impairment of the whole person due to hypertensive disease; com- bine with a rating due to sleep apnea to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Higher impairment if higher BP or more limiting symptoms. Note interaction between hypertension and obstructive sleep apnea and the persistence of hypertension despite multiple med- ications. Also check echo as exertional dyspnea may reflect LVH, which would increase impair- ment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-4
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease
Subject: 40-year-old woman.
History: Elevated BP during pregnancy at 32; nor- mal BP 3 weeks, 12 months postpartum. Recent bleeding between menstrual periods. Several BP readings between 150/100 and 160/105 mm Hg. Elevated leg BP. Low-salt diet and exercise pro- gram did not effectively lower BP. Medication needed.
Current Symptoms: Occasional headaches.
Physical Exam: Otherwise normal.
Clinical Studies: ECG: normal. Chest roentgenogram: normal. Serum electrolyte, BUN, and creatinine levels: normal. Urinalysis: 2+, twice-confirmed proteinuria; sediment: one to three red blood cells per high-power field; 24-hr urine collection: 1400 mg protein.
Diagnosis: Essential hypertension with proteinuria.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Monitor for further renal impairment or other end-organ damage.
---END EXAMPLE---
Physical Exam: BP: 170/95 mm Hg in both arms; PR: 64 BPM. No signs of congestive heart failure (CHF). Fundus: increased light reflexes from arte- rioles and arteriovenous crossing depressions; no hemorrhages or exudates. Disk flat. Enlarged, sus- tained LV impulse in normal position. Normal S ;
increased in intensity; S present.
Clinical Studies: ECG: LV hypertrophy; tall R and inverted T waves in lateral chest leads. Chest roentgenogram: mild cardiomegaly; pulmonary vasculature normal. Serum electrolyte levels and urinalysis: normal.
Diagnosis: Essential hypertension and hypertensive heart disease with documented LV hypertrophy.
Impairment Rating: 30% to 39% impairment of the whole person.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-6
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease

Subject: 55-year-old man
History: Hypertension; beta-blocker and ACE- inhibitor. Well-controlled BP remained in normal range.
Current Symptoms: None. Remains mildly active.
Physical Exam: Normal except for S ; sustained


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-5
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease
Subject: 48-year-old man.
History: Severe hypertension; intermittent therapeu- tic drugs. Current triple therapy: beta-blocker, vasodilator, and diuretic.
Current Symptoms: None. Remains mildly active.

apical impulse.
Clinical Studies: ECG: LV hypertrophy.
Echocardiogram: consistent; concentric, increased wall thickness. Normal systolic function; II/IV diastolic dysfunction.
Diagnosis: Hypertensive heart disease with LV hypertrophy and early diastolic dysfunction.
Impairment Rating: 30% to 39% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Evidence of end-organ damage but asymptomatic; medication adequately controls hypertension and treats end-organ dysfunction. Higher impairment if (a) more symptoms, (b) additional medications required to control hyper- tension, or (c) greater evidence of additional end- organ damage.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-7
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease

Subject: 48-year-old man.
History: In hospital 8 months ago for 2 weeks of headaches, blurred vision, and breathlessness. BP: 260/160 mm Hg in arms and legs. Drowsy; no localizing neurologic signs. Fundi: arterial spasm, hemorrhages, and bilateral papilledema.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic.
Physical Exam: Papilledema cleared with treatment, remained asymptomatic. Normal heart, lungs,

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-8
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease

Subject: 62-year-old woman.
History: 10 years’ BP treatment. Elevated BP despite medication, salt restriction, and weight control. CHF 2 years ago; improved with digitalis and diuretics.
Current Symptoms: 6 months’ marked tiredness and breathlessness with ordinary activity; ankle edema. Difficulty in performing most activities of daily living.
Physical Exam: BP: 180/100 mm Hg in arms and legs. Ankle and lower leg edema. Fundus: increased arteriole light reflexes, arteriovenous crossing compressions, no hemorrhages or exu- dates; flat disks. Apical impulse: enlarged, sus- tained, displaced to anterior axillary line. Normal S ; increased S ; S and S present. Rales at both lung bases.
Clinical Studies: ECG: deep S wave in V ; normal R

abdomen.

waves in V

and V . Low T waves in I, L,

Clinical Studies: Chest roentgenogram: normal. ECG: Low T waves in lateral chest leads. BUN:
14.3 mmol/L (40 mg/dL); serum creatinine:
203 mmol/L (2.3 mg/dL). Urinalysis: abnormal: 3+ proteinuria, numerous red blood cells, occa- sional white blood cells. Diastolic BP remained
>120 mm Hg despite three antihypertensives.
Diagnosis: Essential hypertension with a history of hypertensive encephalopathy.
Impairment Rating: 55% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Lower impairment if diastolic pressure, renal function return to normal but not if any of other findings persist.
---END EXAMPLE---
and V through V . Chest roentgenogram: car- diomegaly; pulmonary vasculature prominent in upper lung fields. Serum electrolyte, BUN, creatinine levels, and urinalysis: normal.
Echocardiogram: increased wall thickness; dilated LV cavity with global hypokinesis; 0.30 EF.
Diagnosis: Essential hypertension with CHF.
Impairment Rating: 80% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Lower impairment after hypertension treatment if improvement in HF symptoms and EF. Note: Impairment class corresponds to car- diomyopathy impairment in Chapter 3. Here, the class 4 impairment for hypertensive cardiovascu- lar disease (CVD) is not combined with car- diomyopathy since hypertensive CVD class 4 includes cardiomyopathy.
---END EXAMPLE---

4.2 Diseases of the
	Aorta
Diseases of the aorta, less prevalent than heart dis- ease, can be more acutely life threatening. Diseases of the aorta include atherosclerotic dilatation, dilata- tion and/or stenosis from a concurrent connective tis- sue disease or vasculitis, and atheroembolic complications from diffuse aortic atherosclerosis.

Aortic atherosclerotic dilatation can progress to a significant degree and cause dyspnea, wheezing, cough, recurrent pneumonia, and hemoptysis. Aortic dilatation can be associated with significant aortic regurgitation and can also enlarge to the point of rup- ture and death.


The physician must obtain a careful and detailed his- tory to estimate aortic involvement. Physical exami- nation and chest roentgenogram may suggest aortic enlargement, but often a more advanced imaging assessment is necessary. MRI, CT scan, and trans- esophageal imaging identify aortic aneurysms, aortic vasculitic involvement, and atheromatous emboli sources. Laboratory studies help establish the pres- ence of atheroemboli.8-13


4.2 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Diseases of the Aorta See Table 4-3 for the classification of whole person impairment due to diseases of the aorta.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-9
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Disease of the Aorta

Subject: 60-year-old woman.
History: Mild hypertension; well-controlled with medications.
Current Symptoms: Denies cardiac symptoms.
Physical Exam: Unremarkable.
Clinical Studies: CT scan: mild ectasia of ascending aorta to 45 mm. No aortic regurgitation. No sig- nificant atherosclerosis. Laboratory: normal.
Diagnosis: Ectasia of the ascending aorta.

Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Aortic ectasia unlikely to progress to aor- tic aneurysm; no effect on function. Evaluate for impairment from hypertension.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-10
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Disease of the Aorta


Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Excellent health except for past tobacco use.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Abdominal ultrasound: 3.9-cm abdominal aortic aneurysm.


Diagnosis: Asymptomatic abdominal aortic aneurysm.
Impairment Rating: 0% to 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Small abdominal aortic aneurysm may or may not progress. Periodic ultrasound or CT scan. Higher impairment if symptomatic.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-11
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Disease of the Aorta

Subject: 60-year-old man.
History: Uncomplicated surgical repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm 5 years ago.
Current Symptoms: None.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Abdominal ultrasound: well-seated graft; aneurysm repair site normal.
Diagnosis: Abdominal aortic aneurysm with surgical repair; no evidence of recurrence.
Impairment Rating: 10% to 15% of the whole person.
Comment: Higher impairment if graft failure evidence, adjacent vasculature enlargement, or peripheral embolization from the graft.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-12
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Disease of the Aorta

Subject: 50-year-old man.
History: Mixed connective tissue disorder.
Current Symptoms: None at rest. Participating in community senior sports league causes symptoms.
Physical Exam: BP: 130/50 mm Hg; PR: 88 BPM; 1/6 diastolic murmur.
Clinical Studies: Transesophageal echocardiogram: proximal ascending aortic enlargement at 50 mm; mild aortic regurgitation.

Diagnosis: Proximal ascending aortic aneurysm, asymptomatic.
Impairment Rating: 10% to 20% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Aortic aneurysm at increased risk of progression. Asymptomatic but annual follow-ups for aneurysm progression.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-13
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Disease of the Aorta


Subject: 48-year-old woman.
History: Twice experienced peripheral atheroembolic complications from diffuse aortic atherosclerosis. “Blue toe” resolved with treatment; mild renal insufficiency after subcutaneous heparin injections for deep vein thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis fol- lowing uncomplicated knee arthroscopic procedure.
Current Symptoms: Fatigue and pain on walking long distances.
Physical Exam: Embolic lesions on foot.
Clinical Studies: Transesophageal echocardiogram: “shaggy atheromatous” changes in distal descend- ing thoracic aorta; one mobile atheromatous plaque 0.5 mm by 1.5 mm. Enlarged ascending aorta 54 mm in sinotubular junction. Stopped smoking; statin cholesterol-lowering agent for hyperlipidemia. Combination beta-blocker and alpha-blocker for aneurysm.
Diagnosis: Proximal ascending aortic aneurysm with diffuse atheromatous involvement of the descend- ing aorta with two episodes of peripheral throm- boembolism.
Impairment Rating: 30% to 40% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Aortic aneurysm at increased risk of pro- gression. Increased risk for further atheromatous emboli.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-14
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Disease of the Aorta

Subject: 54-year-old man.
History: Ascending aortic aneurysm. Mildly enlarged proximal ascending aorta 48 mm; traumatic dissection repair primarily involved descending thoracic aorta. Mild preoperative aor- tic regurgitation; no aortic valve replacement.
Current Symptoms: Exertional dyspnea with exer- cise and after walking 1.5 blocks. Denies angina, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
Physical Exam: BP: 140/45 mm Hg; PR: 92 BPM. Normal neck veins; 3/6 diastolic decrescendo murmur at upper sternal border—right > left. LV apical impulse laterally displaced, mildly sustained to palpation. Remainder of examination normal.
Clinical Studies: Chest roentgenogram: mild aortic ectasia and LV enlargement. Echocardiogram: class 3 aortic regurgitation; increased diastolic dimensions 58 cm. 0.62 LVEF. Transesophageal echocardiogram: enlarged ascending aorta 54 mm; secondary aortic regurgitation. Exercise stress test: 5.2 minutes on Bruce protocol; HR
144. Stopped because of dyspnea.
Diagnosis: Progressive symptomatic aortic regurgi- tation secondary to an ascending aortic aneurysm.
Impairment Rating: 30% to 49% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Enlarging aortic aneurysm, aortic regurgitation secondary to aneurysm. Symptoms, significant limitation from aneurysm. Higher impairment if more symptoms or greater severity of valvular dysfunction. Overlap often seen among aortic, valvular, and cardiomyopathic heart diseases.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-15
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Disease of the Aorta

Subject: 62-year-old man.

History: Surgical treatment of dissecting proximal aortic aneurysm 2 years ago; valved conduit.
Postoperative complaint: exertional dyspnea; moderately severe aortic regurgitation. Symptoms persist despite beta-blocker, an ACE-inhibitor, and loop diuretic.
Current Symptoms: Dyspnea after 1 block of exer- tion; discontinued exercise. Requires nap every afternoon. No hypertension.
Physical Exam: BP: 150/85 mm Hg; PR: 96 BPM; 4/6 diastolic murmur at upper right sternal border.
Clinical Studies: Continued dissection of aorta dis- tal to graft insertion.
Diagnosis: Moderately severe aortic regurgitation with exertional dyspnea following repair of proxi- mal aortic dissection.
Impairment Rating: 60% to 70% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Leakage of valved conduit and residual distal dissection. Symptoms are of moderately severe intensity (class 3).
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-16
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Disease of the Aorta


Subject: 52-year-old man.
History: Diffuse aortic atherosclerosis; multiple atheroembolisms for 2 years. Lipid-lowering and potent antiplatelet medications. Nonsmoker for 8 years.
Current Symptoms: Moderate to severe exertional dyspnea (< 1 block); moderate edema. Some inconsistent claudication. Unable to perform most activities of daily living.
Physical Exam: Lower extremity livedo reticularis; pitting edema.
Clinical Studies: Three emergent surgical embolec- tomies. Moderate renal impairment.
Diagnosis: Severe, diffuse atheroemboli from aortic atherosclerosis with concurrent peripheral edema and moderate renal failure.
Impairment Rating: 60% to 80% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Progressive condition; very sympto- matic. No surgical therapies exist given diffuse nature of aortic atherosclerosis. Potential impair- ment from three body systems—aorta, kidney, and peripheral vascular—should be integrated in determining the total degree of impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

4.3 Vascular Diseases Affecting the
	Extremities
Peripheral vascular disease (PVD) that leads to per- manent impairment usually includes (1) arterial dis- orders that reduce blood flow and lead to one or more of the following: intermittent claudication, pain at rest, minor trophic changes, ulceration, gangrene, extremity loss, or Raynaud’s phenomenon; (2) venous disorders that lead to one or more of the fol- lowing: pain, edema, induration, stasis dermatitis, or ulceration; or (3) lymphatic disorders that lead to chronic lymphedema and may be complicated by recurrent acute infection.

Arterial disorders are most commonly caused by arteriosclerosis, trauma, and inflammatory processes such as thromboangiitis obliterans. The venous sys- tem is most frequently affected by varicose veins, thrombosis, and chronic deep venous insufficiency. The lymphatic system may become impaired by inflammatory or neoplastic processes.

Noninvasive laboratory studies are valuable in con- firming occlusive arterial disease or venous abnor- malities of the extremities. To estimate functional impairment due to occlusive peripheral arterial dis- ease, determine ankle or arm systolic pressure indices before, and 1 minute after, standard exercise (eg, walking on a treadmill at 2 miles per hour at a 10% grade for 5 minutes, or something less strenu- ous if the individual’s symptoms warrant it).14, 15

Before evaluating impairment, establish a specific diagnosis of vascular disease. The impairment esti- mate depends on the extent, severity, and impact of the lesions rather than on the specific diagnosis.

Table 4-4 provides a classification of impairments due to peripheral vascular disease. Physical signs of vascular damage must be present and are the primary


determinants in placing the the examinee into one of these classes. Raynaud’s phenomenon consists of localized blanching of one or more fingers, followed by a period of cyanosis, followed by erythema. Pain on exposure to cold or generalized paleness of the fingers on exposure to cold do not in themselves indicate Raynuad’s. When amputation due to periph- eral vascular disease is involved, the impairment due to amputation should be evaluated separately and combined with the appropriate value in Table 4-4 using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

It is important to differentiate Raynaud’s symptoms on the basis of obstructive physiology from those occurring because of vasoreactivity. Individuals with obstructive physiology will often experience symp- toms more frequently and to a greater degree of severity. Establish the presence of obstructive physi- ology by objective testing. Arterial pressure ratios between the affected digits and the brachial pressure (finger/brachial index) are easily performed. A ratio of < 0.8 suggests obstructive physiology, even if Raynaud’s symptoms are not present. Obstuctive physiology can also be established by the use of cutaneous laser Doppler flowmetry. This technique is established and can reliably assess microcirculation performance and real time changes in skin blood flow.16

4.3 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Vascular Diseases Affecting the Extremities
The criteria for evaluating impairment due to vascu- lar diseases of the upper extremity are found in Table 4-4; for lower extremity, Table 4-5.

To translate an upper extremity impairment into a whole person impairment, multiply the upper
extremity impairment by 0.6 or use Table 16-3 in the upper extremities chapter. To translate the lower extremity impairment to a whole person impairment, multiply the lower impairment by 0.4, or use Table 17-3 in the lower extremities chapter.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-17
0% to 9% Impairment of the Upper Extremity
Subject: 25-year-old man.
History: Raynaud’s phenomenon of fingers for 1 year.
Current Symptom’s: Fingers blanch and painful when exposed to cold or stress. Some impairment in performing activities of daily living.
Physical Exam: Normal. Blanching of digits due to exposure to temperatures < 0°C (32°F) or extreme emotional stress; 1 mg of prazosin twice daily relieved problem, except on rare occasions.
Clinical Studies: Finger/brachial index = 0.6.
Diagnosis: Raynaud’s phenomenon, with obstructive physiology.
Impairment Rating: 5% to 9% impairment of the upper extremity.
Comment: Some interference with activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-18
10% to 39% Impairment of the Upper Extremity

Subject: 58-year-old man.
History: Gangrenous second finger of right hand. Arteriovenous fistula for chronic hemodialysis due to renal failure secondary to diabetes mellitus.
Current Symptoms: Performs most daily activities.
Physical Exam: Gangrenous second finger.
Clinical Studies: Angiography: tight stenosis distal to AV fistula. Stenosis treated with percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA), but digit required amputation.
Diagnosis: Gangrene of the finger secondary to PVD.
Impairment Rating: 35% to 39% impairment of the upper extremity.
Comment: Gangrene of a single digit with evidence of persistent PVD. Higher impairment if addi- tional amputated digits or if he experiences symp- toms. Additional impairment may be assigned due to degree of renal failure requiring dialysis and evidence of end-organ damage from diabetes mellitus.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-19
40% to 69% Impairment of the Upper Extremity


Subject: 45-year-old woman.
History: Raynaud’s phenomenon from scleroderma for 9 years.
Current Symptoms: Ulcerations on tips of index and ring fingers of both hands, which completely healed with conservative measures and prazosin.
Physical Exam: Autoamputation of the distal half of the distal phalanges of the index and ring fingers of the left hand.
Clinical Studies: A finger/brachial ratio of 0.6 and laser Doppler signals consistent with microcircu- latory impairment.
Diagnosis: Scleroderma with Raynaud’s phenome- non and multiple digital ulcerations and partial amputation of two digits.
Impairment Rating: 55% impairment of the upper extremity due to vascular disease, combined with 25% impairment of the index and ring fingers due to amputation. Combining these values yields an impairment of 66% of the left upper extremity, or 40% whole person impairment. The right upper extremity is in the middle range of class 2, or 25% of the upper right extremity, or 15% of the body as a whole. Combining these values yields 49% of the body as a whole.
Comment: This woman has experienced Raynaud’s phenomenon secondary to obstructive physiology but has also suffered autoamputation of portions of two digits. The left upper extremity was put in the midrange of class 3 because she has loss of only the distal portion of two digits. The right upper extremity was put in the middle range of class 2 because of the presence of ulcerations without amputation.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-20
90% to 100% Impairment of the Upper Extremity

Subject: 48-year-old man.
History: Traumatic amputation of both hands in con- struction accident. Constant phantom pain in both extremities.

Current Symptoms: Phantom pain bilaterally.
Physical Exam: Healed amputations of both wrists in upper extremities; no ulcerations noted.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Traumatic amputation with phantom pain.
Impairment Rating: 100% impairment of the upper extremity.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-21
0% to 9% impairment of the Lower Extremity
Subject: 48-year-old man.
History: Left leg edema after coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery. No DVT or lower extrem- ity cellulitis. Compression stocking; no further symptoms. Mild edema 1 year ago when he forgot stocking.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Noninvasive venous plethysmogra- phy; mild incompetence of left lower extremity veins.


Diagnosis: Mild incompetence of the left lower extremity venous system.
Impairment Rating: 0% to 9% impairment of the lower extremity.
Comment: Mild incompetence of deep venous sys- tem following vein harvesting for CABG surgery. Symptoms controlled by compression stocking. Has no limitations. Higher impairment if (a) more symptoms, (b) venous compression stocking not controlling symptoms on intermittent basis, or (c) signs of venous stasis dermatitis or other signs of chronic venous incompetence.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-22
10% to 39% Impairment of the Lower Extremity

Subject: 36-year-old man.
History: Progressive swelling of both lower extremi- ties for 8 years; edema did not recede overnight. Four to eight episodes a year of acute malaise with chills and fever that required treatment of the dermatophytosis and monthly injections of long- acting penicillin.
Current Symptoms: Leg edema receded incom- pletely with elevation for 3 days; incompletely controlled with heavy-duty, fitted leotard.
Physical Exam: Firm edema of both legs, feet, and toes. Bilateral interdigital fissuring (typical of dermatophytosis).
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Lymphedema of both legs secondary to recurring lymphangitis.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the lower extremity.
Comment: Moderate edema incompletely controlled by elastic support.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-23
10% to 39% Impairment of the Lower Extremity


Subject: 48-year-old woman.
History: Diabetic. Amputation of gangrenous fourth toe 1 year ago. Completed physical rehabilitation; ambulates normally. Returned to teaching.
Current Symptoms: Denies further trouble with lower extremity ulcers.
Physical Exam: Well-healed amputation site; no additional abnormalities. Gait essentially normal.
Clinical Studies: Glucose level: slighty elevated.
Diagnosis: Amputation of left fourth toe for gan- grene, now resolved.
Impairment Rating: 20% to 30% impairment of the lower extremity.
Comment: Complete recovery from amputation.
Higher impairment if additional digits amputated or if ambulation limited from surgery.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-24
40% to 69% Impairment of the Lower Extremity


Subject: 54-year-old man.
History: PVD complication: ulcerated left great toe.
Conservative treatment failed; toe gangrenous. Toe amputated; returned to work but could not perform duties on foot. Ulcerated then gangrenous right fifth toe 6 months later; toe amputated.
Individual recovered; asymptomatic. Gait returned to preoperative level for short distances.
Current Symptoms: Difficulty standing or walking for long periods.
Physical Exam: Well-healed amputation sites; no ulcerations.
Clinical Studies: None.


Diagnosis: Amputation of two digits secondary to PVD.
Impairment Rating: 60% to 69% impairment of the lower extremity.
Comment: Encourage excellent foot hygiene.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-25
70% to 89% Impairment of the Lower Extremity

Subject: 24-year-old man.
History: 3 years’ recurrent thrombophlebitis in lower extremities. Venous stasis ulceration of right ankle 1 year ago; bed rest, skin grafting to effect healing. Long-term oral anticoagulant ther- apy to prevent further thrombosis.
Current Symptoms: Difficulty with prolonged standing and ambulation.
Physical Exam: Marked standing bilateral leg and ankle edema despite full-length fitted elastic stockings.
Clinical Studies: Noninvasive venous plethysmogra- phy: recurrent thrombophlebitis; deep venous insufficiency.
Diagnosis: Recurrent thrombophlebitis with bilateral chronic postphlebitic deep venous insufficiency.
Impairment Rating: 80% impairment of the lower extremity.
Comment: Marked, postphlebitic deep venous insuf- ficiency caused venous stasis ulceration; depend- ent leg edema poorly controlled by elastic support.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-26
70% to 89% Impairment of the Lower Extremity

Subject: 62-year-old man.
History: Diabetic.

Current Symptoms: Painful extremity ulcers; ten- derness in foot. Claudication when walking short distances.
Physical Exam: Painful ulcers on third, fourth, and fifth toes of left foot.
Clinical Studies: Peripheral angiography: diffuse distal arterial disease. Transcutaneous oximetry: limited amputation unlikely to effect healing.
Diagnosis: Severe claudication with painful ulcers.
Impairment Rating: 80% to 89% impairment of the lower extremity.
Comment: May need BKA to resolve ulcers. Needs excellent control of diabetes.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-27
90% to 100% Impairment of the Lower Extremity


Subject: 56-year-old man.
History: Myocardial infarction; category III angina pectoris. Type 1 diabetic. Symptomatic arte- riosclerosis obliterans in lower extremities for 9 years. Walking capacity < 25 feet; calf pain.
Current Symptoms: Pain worse at night.
Progressing renal insufficiency; creatinine 407 mmol/L (4.6 mg/dL).
Physical Exam: Cool extremity. Painful, nonhealing ulcers right great toe and heel.
Clinical Studies: Ankle brachial indices < 0.3.
Diagnosis: Arteriosclerosis obliterans with ischemic ulceration and ischemic rest pain in diabetic man with severe CAD and moderate renal insufficiency.
Impairment Rating: 95% impairment of the lower extremity.
Comment: Severe occlusive peripheral arterial dis- ease warrants procedure to restore pulsatile flow to right leg. Arteriography hazardous due to renal insufficiency; coronary disease markedly increases surgical risk. Consider renal transplant.
---END EXAMPLE---

4.4 Diseases of the
	Pulmonary Arteries
Primary pulmonary hypertension is a consequence of obliterative and plexiform changes of unknown etiol- ogy in the pulmonary arteriolar bed. Many other causes of pulmonary hypertension include pul- monary parenchymal disease, left-sided HF, CHF, and PVD (either from pulmonary emboli or systemic disease). Pulmonary venous and capillary system disorders can also produce pulmonary hypertension. All of these disorders are classified disorders of the pulmonary circulation for impairment assessment.

The physician should take a careful history of func- tional impairment and symptoms for individuals with pulmonary hypertension. Classic findings include a right ventricular (RV) lift and an increased intensity of the S pulmonic component. Pulmonary hypertension is often diagnosed by chest roentgenogram changes, RV hypertrophy, or ECG strain. The definitive

assessment of pulmonary hypertension is made by PAP assessment with an echocardiogram or right heart catheterization.17-20


4.4 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Pulmonary Hypertension
The degree of pulmonary hypertension can be classi- fied by the measurement of PAP or PA resistance.
Impairment classification should be based on more than the observed PAP; also consider the presence or absence of signs and symptoms of right HF. Dyspnea is the most limiting symptom of pulmonary hyper- tension. Cyanosis may occur from right to left shunt- ing, especially in individuals with pulmonary hypertension associated with CHF.

Table 4-6 lists the impairment criteria for disorders of the pulmonary circulation. (The Guides follows the new World Health Organization [WHO] criteria for pulmonary hypertension classification.21)


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-28
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Pulmonary Hypertension
Subject: 43-year-old man.
History: Moderate obesity (body mass index 29).
No diet pill or illicit drug use.
Current Symptoms: No symptoms.
Physical Exam: Systolic ejection murmur.

Clinical Studies: Chest roentgenogram: normal.
ECG: normal. Echocardiogram: normal ventricu- lar function. Mild pulmonary hypertension; esti- mated PAP 45 mm Hg. Heart valves: normal.
Diagnosis: Mild pulmonary hypertension.
Impairment Rating: 0% to 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Counsel individual to exercise regularly and lose weight. Higher impairment if right HF symptoms.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-29
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Pulmonary Hypertension
Subject: 48-year-old woman.
History: Smoker for 35 years.
Current Symptoms: Dyspnea with slight exertion.
No angina or peripheral edema.
Physical Exam: Prolonged expiration otherwise normal.
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram: normal LV size and function, valvular function, right heart size and function. Mild PA hypertension; estimated PAP: 45 mm Hg; systemic pressure: 120 mm Hg. Pulmonary function testing: moderate chronic obstuctive pulmonary disease (COPD); FEV 55%. Counseled to stop smoking.
Diagnosis: Mild pulmonary hypertension secondary to COPD.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person
Comment: Combine impairment from PA hyperten- sion with respiratory impairment to determine whole person impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-30
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Pulmonary Hypertension
Subject: 58-year-old woman.
History: Fully recovered from pulmonary embolism 5 years ago.
Current Symptoms: None. Exercises regularly
Physical Exam: Normal; soft, 1/6 holosystolic heart murmur, intensifies with inspiration.
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram: PAP: 55 mm Hg. Mildly enlarged RV; moderate pulmonary valve regurgitation.
Diagnosis: Moderate pulmonary hypertension secondary to possible pulmonary embolism.
Impairment Rating: 10% to 15% of the whole person.

Comment: Higher impairment if any signs of right HF. Identify potential underlying cause, particu- larly chronic pulmonary thromboembolic disease.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-31
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Pulmonary Hypertension


Subject: 38-year-old woman.
History: Heart murmur. Exercises regularly; lost
24.7 kg (55 lbs).
Current Symptoms: Denies right HF symptoms.
Physical Exam: Normal; jugular pressure normal.
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram: mild tricuspid and pulmonary regurgitation. Mild RV enlarge- ment. Normal systolic function; estimated PAP: 60 mm Hg. Systemic pressure: 110 mm Hg.
Diagnosis: Moderate pulmonary artery hypertension with mild RV enlargement. No signs of HF.
Impairment Rating: 15% to 20% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Moderate pulmonary hypertension. No evidence of right HF. Evaluate regularly; treat possible causes of pulmonary hypertension to pre- vent progression. If persistent, consider vasodila- tor therapy.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-32
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Pulmonary Hypertension


Subject: 38-year-old woman.
History: Abnormal ECG. 2 years’ moderate dyspnea while walking up two flights of stairs.
Current Symptoms: External dyspnea.
Physical Exam: Right ventricular heave; increased P .
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram: estimated PAP: 70 mm Hg. Normal LV, RV function; no significant valvular disease. Systemic pressure 120 mm Hg.


Diagnosis: Primary pulmonary hypertension with symptoms of mild limitation (class 2).
Impairment Rating: 30% to 40% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Evaluation included cardiac catheteriza- tion and pulmonary angiography. Diagnosis made after other causes excluded. Initiate appropriate treatment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-33
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Pulmonary Hypertension

Subject: 58-year-old man.
History: Pulmonary embolism after arthroscopic knee surgery 5 years ago.
Current Symptoms: Exertional dyspnea during doubles tennis; moderate (2+) pitting edema at end of workday.
Physical Exam: Parasternal heave left and right lower sternal border; tricuspid regurgitation.
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram: pulmonary hyper- tension. PAP: 55 mm Hg; systemic BP: 140 mm Hg. Moderate RV enlargement; moderately severe grade 3 out of 4 tricuspid regurgitation. Started on nitrates, digitalis, and diuretics. After 3 months, dyspnea present; less peripheral edema.
Diagnosis: Moderate pulmonary hypertension and RV failure possibly secondary to pulmonary embolism.
Impairment Rating: 40% to 49% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Moderate pulmonary hypertension and right HF that improved slightly on medical ther- apy. Higher impairment if symptoms progress. Directed evaluation and treatment are warranted.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-34
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Pulmonary Hypertension

Subject: 42-year-old woman.

History: Primary pulmonary hypertension. PAP: 80 mm Hg; systemic pressure: 120 mm Hg. Mild shortness of breath when pulling luggage at air- port. Denies edema, other symptoms; lips turn blue with exertion.
Current Symptoms: Perform some daily activities without dyspnea; symptomatic with moderately severe exertion.
Phyical Exam: Increased right ventricular heave; increased P .
Clinical Studies: Echocardiagram: increased pul- monary pressure estimated at 70 mm Hg.
Diagnosis: Primary pulmonary hypertension with mild symptoms.
Impairment Rating: 50% to 70% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Higher impairment if greater difficulty performing activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 4-35
50% to 100% Impairment Due to Pulmonary Hypertension


Subject: 37-year-old man.
History: Scleroderma; CREST syndrome.
Treatment: diuretics, nitrates, and digitalis.
Current Symtoms: Exertional dyspnea with mild to moderate exertion. Daily morning peripheral edema. Very tired by midmorning.
Physical Exam: Changes of scleroderma; systolic heart murmur along lower left sternal border.
Clinical Studies: Echocardiogram: large RV with severely depressed function. Estimated PAP: 58 mm Hg. Normal LV, left-sided heart valve function. Exercise stress test: significant func-
tional impairment; 3.5 minutes on Bruce protocol before stopping with severe dyspnea. Peak HR: 115 BPM.
Diagnosis: Pulmonary hypertension with associated scleroderma and symptoms of moderate to severe functional limitation.
Impairment Rating: 70% to 90% impairment due to cardiovascular disease; combine with impair- ment due to muskuloskeletal disorders to deter- mine whole person impairment.
Comment: Moderate pulmonary hypertension; significant functional limitation and comorbid disease.
---END EXAMPLE---

4.5 Cardiovascular Impairment
	Evaluation Summary


See Table 4.7 for an evaluation summary for the assessment of systemic and pulmonary artery cardiovascular impairment.






================================================================================
Chapter 5: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Respiratory System
5.1 Principles of Assessment
5.2 Symptoms Associated With Respiratory Disease
5.3 Tobacco Use and Environmental Exposure Associated With Respiratory Disease
5.4 Examinations, Clinical Studies, and Other Tests for Evaluating Respiratory Disease
5.5 Asthma
5.6 Obstructive Sleep Apnea
5.7 Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis
5.8 Pneumoconiosis
5.9 Lung Cancer
5.10 Permanent Impairment Due to Respiratory Disorders
5.11 Respiratory Impairment Evaluation Summary
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating perma- nent impairment of the respiratory system as it affects overall lung function and the ability to per-
form the activities of daily living. The respiratory sys- tem includes the tracheobronchial tree, pulmonary parenchyma, and ribcage.

The following sections have been revised for the fifth edition: (1) criteria for asthma impairment were updated to incorporate guidelines recently published by the American Thoracic Society (ATS)1; (2) respi- ratory impairment criteria now incorporate the lower limits of normal2 for forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1), and diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DCO); and (3) the section on sleep apnea has been updated to reflect current assessment and practice.


87


5.1 Principles of
	Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for per- forming and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluations.

The purpose of respiratory impairment assessment is to determine if a permanent respiratory impairment exists, quantify its severity, assess its impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living, and, if possible, identify the cause of the abnormality and recommend measures to prevent further impairment and ensure optimum function.

An impairment, as stated in Chapter 1, is “a loss, loss of use, or derangement of any body part, organ sys- tem, or organ function” (Table 1-1). Not all impair- ments result in a functional loss or affect the ability to perform activities of daily living. Respiratory impairments that produce a decrement of lung func- tion and affect the ability to perform activities of daily living are assigned an impairment rating. For example, an anatomic change such as a circum- scribed pleural plaque would be an impairment based on an abnormality in anatomic structure. However, if there were no abnormality in lung function and no decrease in the ability to perform activities of daily living, the individual would be assigned a 0% impairment rating.

Changes in organ function are the primary criteria for determining the impairment class. To establish the specific impairment percentage, consider both the severity and prognosis of the condition and how the impairment affects the individual’s ability to per- form the activities of daily living listed in Table 1-2. Table 5-13 is provided at the end of the chapter to ensure all pertinent information is included in the respiratory assessment.


Begin the evaluation with an inquiry into specific symptoms and their severity, duration, and manner of onset. Since environmental exposure frequently leads to symptomatic complaints, it is important to deter- mine if the individual’s personal habits or surround- ings, such as cigarette smoking and workplace exposures, explain or contribute to the symptoms. A thorough history enables the examiner to direct the physical examination to areas of concern and then identify the most useful diagnostic and evaluative studies. For instance, structural and movement disor- ders of the chest wall or diaphragm found on physical examination would prompt different investigations than an observation of wheezing. Radiographic tech- niques such as chest roentgenograms or computed tomography (CT) scans help elucidate anatomic abnormalities that are sometimes diagnostic of spe- cific disease processes. To assess impairment, weigh both subjective and objective information derived from thorough history-taking, physical examination, imaging and laboratory studies, and pulmonary func- tion tests. These complementary evaluation tech- niques enable the examiner to obtain an accurate and thorough view of the impairment’s nature, as well as the individual’s limitations and ability to perform activities of daily living.


5.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs Symptomatic assessment of individuals with respira- tory disease is diagnostically useful, but it provides limited quantitative information and should not serve as the sole criterion upon which to make decisions about impairment. Rather, the examiner should obtain objective data about the extent of the limita- tion and integrate those findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent impairment.


5.1 b Description of Clinical Studies Clinical studies used to assess pulmonary impair- ment include radiographs; other imaging studies, including CT scans and MR images; pulmonary function tests; and exercise testing. Pulmonary function tests are the most useful in assessing functional changes.


5.2 Symptoms Associated With
	Respiratory Disease
The major symptoms of pulmonary disease include dyspnea; cough, sputum production, and hemoptysis; wheezing; and chest pain or tightness. The examiner needs to document these symptoms and their course over time, and correlate the symptoms with objective studies to assess their importance and implications. The significance of respiratory symptoms is better understood when integrated with findings from more objective measures such as the physical examination, radiography, lung function, and laboratory studies.


5.2 a Dyspnea
Dyspnea is the most common symptom noted on ini- tial examination of individuals with any type of pul- monary impairment. Despite its importance, dyspnea is nonspecific; it is often caused by cardiac, hemato- logic, metabolic, or neurologic disease, or by anxiety or physical deconditioning.

Dyspnea can be evaluated and quantitated using sev- eral systems. The most widely used classification system, developed with the ATS, (Table 5-1), is based on the American Thoracic Society/Division of Lung Diseases Respiratory Symptom questionnaire.3 The ATS classification is best used in conjunction with more objective respiratory function measurements. If a disparity is found between subjective complaints of dyspnea and findings on respiratory testing, consider a nonrespiratory dyspnea component.4


* The person’s lowest level of physical activity and exertion that produces breathlessness denotes the severity of dyspnea.3
5.2
b Cough, Sputum Production, and Hemoptysis
Coughing can be an important indicator of respira- tory tract disease, although it is difficult to quantify and not easily measured. Document its presence or absence, whether it is productive or nonproductive of sputum, its relationship to work or other activities, its duration, its association with hemoptysis, and whether further investigation is warranted.

An acute, self-limited cough is most commonly due to infection or irritation. A subacute or recurrent, nonproductive cough may be a manifestation of asthma and should be investigated with pulmonary function testing. A chronic, productive cough may indicate bronchitis. According to ATS criteria, the term chronic bronchitis may be used to describe a sputum-producing cough that occurs on most days for at least 3 consecutive months a year for at least 2 consecutive years.4

Hemoptysis frequently accompanies bronchitis and pneumonia, usually as blood-streaked sputum.
Serious conditions that often manifest with hemopty- sis include bronchogenic carcinoma, pulmonary emboli, bronchiectasis, tuberculosis, aspergilloma, and arteriovenous malformations. At a minimum, hemoptysis requires radiologic evaluation that may uncover respiratory or other impairment-producing types of diseases.


5.2 c Wheezing
Subjects with partial airway obstruction often report high-pitched, musical sounds, or wheezing. These sounds can be generated at any point along the respi- ratory tract from the glottis to the bronchioles.
Inspiratory wheezing, or stridor, suggests laryngeal disease; expiratory wheezing indicates bron- chospasm or localized bronchial narrowing.
Information about seasonal wheezing is also diag- nostically significant. Wheezing and/or cough occur- ring primarily in the workplace or having a definite temporal relationship to work suggests occupational asthma; wheezing that follows several minutes of exercise suggests exercise-induced asthma; and wheezing that usually accompanies respiratory tract infections is classified as asthmatic bronchitis. While these different varieties of asthma are commonly described as separate entities, there is substantial overlap among the syndromes. This is due to the underlying commonalities of airway hyperrespon- siveness in all types of asthma.


5.2 d Thoracic Cage Abnormalities
Osseous spine abnormalities may produce respira- tory impairment due to mechanical factors involving the size of the chest cavity and restriction of rib motion. Kyphoscoliosis, the most common of these abnormalities, is characterized by curvature of the vertebral column from side to side in the frontal plane (scoliosis) and from the dorsal to the ventral aspect of the sagittal plane (kyphosis). The Cobb method is the most common measurement tool for curvature severity. With this method, posteroanterior and lateral spinal radiographs measure the curvature angles. Only severe curvature angles—that is, Cobb angles that are greater than 100°—are likely to lead to respiratory failure. Even when there are severe spinal deformities, respiratory decompensation usu- ally does not occur until middle age or later.

With severe spinal abnormalities, respiratory com- promise is produced by the combined effects of restricted lung volume, decreased cross-sectional area of the vascular bed, and age-related decrease in chest wall compliance. Progressive stiffness of the chest wall with advancing age increases the work of breathing and leads to hypoventilation, which pro- duces hypoxia and hypercapnia. Hypoxia is a power- ful pulmonary vasoconstrictor and further decreases the vascular cross-sectional area, eventually leading to cor pulmonale. Judge the severity of respiratory impairment on the criteria described in the sections on forced respiratory maneuvers (5.4d), diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (5.4e), and the criteria for rating impairment due to respiratory disease (5.4g) in this chapter.


5.3 Tobacco Use and Environmental Exposure Associated With Respiratory
	Disease
5.3 a Tobacco Use
Exposure to tobacco smoke is a common cause of respiratory impairment. Although susceptibility to the adverse effects of cigarette smoke varies, there is a discernible dose-response relationship. The examiner

should ask the individual’s current age; the age at which he or she started smoking; the average number of packs smoked per day if the smoking has contin- ued; and, if the person quit smoking at any time, the age and date he or she quit smoking.

Multiply the number of years of smoking by the number of packs smoked per day to produce the standard measure of pack-years of cigarette smoking. Use this information to assess the impact of personal habits on respiratory impairment. Cigarette smoking is the most frequent causative factor in the develop- ment of chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and lung cancer, and it can exacerbate asthma. Chronic expo- sure to environmental tobacco smoke may also be a factor in the origin of lung cancer, and it can also exacerbate asthma. Smoking cessation should be noted since it often benefits respiratory status.
Although the anatomic abnormalities of emphysema are irreversible, both bronchospasm and productive cough can be favorably affected by the discontinua- tion of cigarette use. In addition, risk of bron- chogenic carcinoma decreases progressively in the first 10 to 15 years after quitting smoking. After that time, the risk stabilizes at a point slightly higher than that of someone who has never smoked.5


5.3 b Environmental Exposure Environmental exposures in the workplace often are cited as causative or contributory factors in the development of respiratory impairment. It is impor-
tant to obtain a complete occupational history from the individual to evaluate the possible effect of these exposures. A chief component of the history contains a chronological description of work activities begin- ning with the first year of employment and includes names of employers, the specific types of work per- formed, the materials used by the person, and the potentially toxic materials present in the workplace. Employers are required to maintain a list (made available to the employee and the treating physician in the form of Material Safety Data Sheets) of poten- tially toxic materials used in the workplace, their chemical descriptions, and their physical and health hazards. This information can be quite helpful to the examiner to direct the diagnostic and evaluative process. To assess its significance, ask the individual to estimate the frequency and intensity of exposure to each substance, as well as information about the use of respiratory protective devices.


Respiratory injuries in the workplace can occur in several different patterns, depending on the nature of the inhaled material and the circumstances of expo- sure. Acute lung injury may be the result of inhala- tion of a highly irritative gas, fume, mist, or vapor that results in noncardiogenic pulmonary edema or acute respiratory distress syndrome. If the individual survives the acute lung injury, the healing process may produce diffuse pulmonary fibrosis or oblitera- tive bronchiolitis, which may lead to functional impairment. Depending on the nature, duration, and intensity of exposure, inhalation of irritative sub- stances can cause subsequent persistent problems such as chronic bronchitis and airway hyperreactiv- ity. Allergic pulmonary reactions can result from inhalation of organic material or certain types of reactive chemical molecules, causing asthma or hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Inhalation of fibro- genic dust can cause pneumoconiosis over a pro- longed period. Workplace exposures can also exacerbate underlying conditions such as asthma, chronic bronchitis, or emphysema.

In addition to information on workplace exposure, inquire about home and environmental exposure (including hobbies or leisure time activities) to organic and inorganic agents such as allergens, bioaerosols, paints, glues, or pesticides. In the home, exposure to pets and use of cool-mist vaporizers, humidifiers, and indoor hot tubs also may be associ- ated with respiratory disease.


5.4 Examinations, Clinical Studies, and Other Tests for Evaluating
	Respiratory Disease
5.4 a Physical Examination
Although a thorough physical examination is manda- tory to reach valid conclusions about an individual’s impairment, certain portions of the examination are particularly pertinent in evaluating the respiratory system. Observe and record respiratory rate, use of accessory muscles, and body habitus. Noisy breath sounds are a physical finding that may indicate

airflow obstruction. A breathing pattern character- ized by pursed lip breathing during expiration sug- gests chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Inspect the thoracic cage for vertebral or rib cage deformity and movement of the ribs with inspiration and expiration. A barrel-shaped chest may indicate hyperinflation. Percuss the chest to ascertain hyperresonance or consolidation and assess diaphragmatic motion.

Chest auscultation detects decreased breath sounds, crackles, wheezes, or rhonchi. Describe the intensity, quality, and location of these, as well as whether they are heard during inspiration, expiration, or both.
Inspiratory crackles, heard in two thirds of people with chronic interstitial lung disease, may be associ- ated with restrictive respiratory impairment. Wheezes and rhonchi are indicative of bronchial abnormalities and are often accompanied by obstructive airway dis- ease. Auscultate during both quiet breathing and forced expiration before excluding wheezing.
Diffuse, bilateral, expiratory wheezing indicates gen- eralized bronchospasm, while unilateral or localized wheezing may be caused by partial bronchial obstruc- tion due to an endobronchial tumor or mucus plug- ging. Early inspiratory crackles or opening snaps may be heard in diseases of airflow obstruction and partic- ularly in bronchiolitis obliterans.

Cyanosis, indicated by a bluish tint of the lips and nail beds, is a striking but unreliable indicator of severe pulmonary impairment. Poor lighting in the examination room, anemia, and skin pigmentation can interfere with assessment of severity. Suspicion of cyanosis calls for pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas analysis.

Digital clubbing is characterized by loss of the angle at the junction of the cuticle and the nail, softening of the nail bed, increased curvature of the nails, and widening of the distal portions of the fingers and toes. Chest diseases associated with clubbing include pulmonary fibrosis, bronchiectasis, bronchogenic carcinoma, pleural tumors, lung abscess, empyema, and cyanotic congenital heart disease.


5.4 b Chest Roentgenograms
The initial radiographic examination should include posteroanterior and lateral views of the chest taken in full inspiration. Chest radiographic findings often correlate poorly with physiologic findings in diseases with airflow limitation, such as asthma and emphy- sema. Chronic radiographic abnormalities of the chest may be classified as parenchymal, bronchovas- cular, cardiovascular, pleural, or osseous. Mediastinal or tracheal changes may be observed. Terms used to describe parenchymal changes can be classified as hyperinflation, fibrosis, cavitary, or cystic.

Hyperinflation is characteristic of airway obstruc- tion. Radiographic findings of hyperinflation are seen in airway obstruction, while volume restriction is associated with fibrosis, loss of chest wall compli- ance, or severe neuromuscular weakness. Severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is manifested radiographically by diaphragm flattening, attenuation of pulmonary vasculature within the parenchyma, increased anteroposterior diameter of the chest, and increased retrosternal air space. An individual with an acute asthmatic attack can have radiographic evi- dence of hyperinflation without parenchymal vascu- lar attenuation; when the asthmatic attack dissipates, the radiographic appearance reverts to normal.

Diffuse fibrotic changes in the pulmonary parenchyma may appear linear (streaky) and/or nodular (rounded). Specific diagnostic information is obtained by noting both the type and the predomi- nant location of fibrotic changes and whether they are focal or diffuse. For example, silicosis is mani- fested by nodular opacities that predominate in the upper portions of the chest, while asbestosis is mani- fested by linear opacities that typically are most marked in lower portions of the lungs. Pleural changes such as pleural plaques may also be present in individuals with asbestosis or may be the sole manifestation of past asbestos exposure.

The International Labor Organization (ILO) adopted a standardized method of classifying radiographic abnormalities associated with fibrotic changes caused by pneumoconiosis.6 The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) regu- larly administers a course and examination to certify knowledge and proficiency in the use of this method. Information on courses and programs can be obtained from the NIOSH Division of Respiratory Disease Studies, Morgantown, WVa, or by calling 800 35-NIOSH.

Evidence of cardiovascular abnormalities associated with chronic pulmonary disease is suggested when chest films show evidence of pulmonary hyperten- sion and/or cor pulmonale. Pulmonary hypertension is indicated by enlargement of pulmonary arteries in the hila and rapid tapering of the peripheral vessels. Cor pulmonale presents as an enlargement of the right ventricle and the radiographic indicators of pul- monary hypertension. The presence of pulmonary hypertension and/or cor pulmonale and the severity of those processes may need to be confirmed by additional clinical and laboratory tests.


5.4c Computed Tomography
Computed tomography (CT) and high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) are radiographic techniques than can augment the standard chest radi- ograph and are more sensitive in evaluating certain pulmonary diseases such as asbestosis. Conventional CT is obtained using 10-mm-thick slices through various lung fields. This technique is good for evalu- ating nodules with high radiographic attenuation.
The HRCT, which consists of 1- to 2-mm thick slices every 10 mm, is useful for evaluating changes with low radiographic attenuation such as early interstitial lung disease. The standard CT and/or HRCT can provide greater accuracy as part of a thorough assessment of the pulmonary parenchyma. It should be noted that, in general, the HRCT delivers signifi- cantly less whole body effective dose radiation than the standard CT.

With regard to airway disease, HRCT can detect early changes in the lung consistent with focal emphysema; regional air trapping associated with small airway disease, such as obliterative bronchioli- tis; and large airway abnormalities, such as bronchiectasis. For example, air trapping of the type seen with obliterative bronchiolitis is best demon- strated by comparing full inspiratory and full expira- tory scans. Prone and supine position scans also are helpful in distinguishing hydrostatic changes related to blood volume that are transient and can occur in the dependent position of the lungs from fixed parenchymal abnormalities.7,8


5.4d Forced Expiratory Maneuvers (Simple Spirometry)
Pulmonary function tests, performed on standardized equipment with validated administration techniques, provide the framework for evaluation of respiratory system impairment. Spirometric testing equipment, calibration, and administration techniques must con- form to the guidelines of the 1994 ATS Statement on Standardization of Spirometry.9–15

If tolerated by the individual, remove pulmonary medications up to 24 hours before spirometry or methacholine challenge testing to assess pulmonary function without the effects of medication.

Forced expiratory maneuver measurements are made from at least three acceptable spirometric tracings that demonstrate uniformity pertaining to both the

expiratory flow pattern and concordance of at least two of the test results within 5% of each other.
Measurements include the following: forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1), and the ratio of these measurements (FEV1/FVC). Use the tracings with the highest FVC and FEV1 to calculate the FEV1/FVC ratio, even if these measurements occur on different expiratory efforts.12-14,16

Repeat spirometry after bronchodilator administra- tion if FEV1/FVC is below 0.70 or if there is wheez- ing on physical examination. Use the spirogram indicating the best effort, before or after administra- tion of a bronchodilator, to determine FVC and FEV1 for impairment assessment. Postbronchodilator FEV1 and FVC are important in understanding potential medication responsiveness and prognosis.12,14,17,18


IC = inspiratory capacity; VC = vital capacity; TLC = total lung capacity; RV = residual volume; ERV = expiratory reserve volume.

*Residual volume, and therefore total lung capacity, cannot be measured by spirometry alone.


To use pulmonary function measures, obtain meas- urements of the FVC, FEV, and DCO and compare these to the predicted normal values as presented in Tables 5-2a through 5-7a. For the average or mean predicted normal value, find the individual’s age in the left-hand column and height along the top row; the predicted value lies at the intersection of the appropriate row and column. In addition, identify the lower limit of normal for the measure of interest by using Tables 5-2b through 5-7b. The lower limit of normal has been calculated based upon the standard convention of the lower limit of normal lying at the fifth percentile, below the upper 95% of the refer- ence population, according to recommendations from the ATS.13,14 The lower limits of normal are used to distinguish between class 1 and class 2 respiratory impairment in Table 5-12.

North American whites have larger spirometric values for a given age, height, and gender than North American blacks, with a similar tendency noted for Hispanics, Native Americans, and Asians. Population values of normal lung function have been identified for blacks. The ATS Task Force for Interpretation of Pulmonary Function recommends an adjustment on a population basis for predicted lung function in blacks. Multiply values for predicted normal FVC (Tables
5-2a and 5-3a) by 0.88; for predicted normal FEV1 (Tables 5-4a and 5-5a) by 0.88; and for normal sin- gle-breath DCO (Tables 5-6a and 5-7a) by 0.93. In cases where the correction value may not apply, the examiner may choose not to use this correction and instead may provide an explanation why it is inappro- priate. Reliable population data are not yet available for other ethnic groups, such as Hispanics, Native Americans, and Asians. For these ethnic groups, the values for North American whites may be used.16,19–21

The FEV1/FVC ratio helps diagnose obstructive air- way disease. However, according to the most recent ATS statement on pulmonary function testing inter- pretation, the absolute volume or the percentage of predicted value of FEV1 is the primary parameter for assessing severity of obstruction, although the FEV1/FVC may be helpful.13 Rather, judge severity on the absolute value or the percentage of predicted value of FEV1.

5.4e Diffusing Capacity for Carbon Monoxide (DCO)
Use single-breath DCO to evaluate all levels of impairment. The single-breath DCO testing method is described in a 1995 ATS statement.14,22 The DCO
measurement provides information about gas transfer efficiency across the lungs.23 Several physiologic factors affect the gas transfer process, including alveolar-capillary membrane thickness, available gas exchange surface area, gas solubility, pulmonary capillary blood volume, hematocrit, test gas concen- tration gradient across the alveolar-capillary membrane, and hemoglobin-binding site availability.

Mechanical factors that affect DCO results include test gas inhalation speed, inspiration depth, period of breath holding, and expiration speed. While mechani- cal factors generally are controlled by DCO test automation, extrapulmonary factors are important to ascertain proper interpretation. For example, cigarette smoking can elevate the blood’s carbon monoxide levels, causing as much as 10% to 12% hemoglobin saturation and decreasing DCO. Instruct the individual not to smoke for at least 8 hours before the test.

See Tables 5-6a and 5-7a for reference values for population-based predicted normal diffusing capacity. Use these tables in a manner similar to the spirometry tables. A laboratory that tests DCO under conditions or with procedures different than that rec- ommended by the ATS should either develop and verify its own prediction equations or use an accepted and verified equation.

See Table 5-12 for classification of respiratory impairment based on the testing results of FVC, FEV1, FEV1/FVC, and DCO. Also consider the possi- ble contribution of extrapulmonary factors to respira- tory system impairment. For example, morbid obesity may decrease FVC, and anemia may decrease DCO. Evaluate other organ system impair- ments according to the criteria given in other Guides chapters and combine those impairment ratings with the respiratory system impairment rating (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).


*FVC in liters = 0.0600 H – 0.0214 A – 4.650. R2 = 0.54; SEE = 0.644; 95% confidence level = 1.115. Definitions of abbreviations: R2 = coefficient of determination; SEE = standard error of estimate; H = height in cm; A = age in years. BTPS = body temperature, ambient pressure, and saturated with water vapor at these conditions. Adapted from Crapo et al.2


*FVC values are given in liters. The values listed here reflect the FVC as listed in Table 5–2a minus 1.115 L (95% confidence interval). Adapted from Crapo et al.2


*FVC in liters = 0.0491 H – 0.0216 A – 3.590. R2 = 0.74; SEE = 0.393; 95% confidence interval = 0.676. Definitions of abbreviations: R2 = coefficient of determination; SEE = standard error of estimate; H = height in cm; A = age in years. BTPS = body temperature, ambient pressure, and saturated with water vapor at these conditions. Adapted from Crapo et al.2


*FVC values are given in liters. The values listed here reflect the FVC as listed in Table 5–3a minus 0.676 L (95% confidence interval). Adapted from Crapo et al.2


*FEV1 in liters = 0.0414 H – 0.0244 A – 2.190. R2 = 0.64; SEE = 0.486; 95% confidence interval = 0.842. Definitions of abbreviations: R2 = coefficient of determination; SEE = standard error of estimate; H = height in cm; A = age in years. BTPS = body temperature, ambient pressure, and saturated with water vapor at these conditions. Adapted from Crapo et al.2


*FEV1 values are given in liters. The values listed here reflect the FEV1 as listed in Table 5–4a minus 0.842 L (95% confidence interval). Adapted from Crapo et al.2


*FEV1 in liters = 0.0342 H – 0.0225 A – 1.578. R2 = 0.80; SEE = 0.326; 95% confidence interval = 0.561. Definitions of abbreviations: R2 = coefficient of determination; SEE = standard error of estimate; H = height in cm; A = age in years. BTPS = body temperature, ambient pressure, and saturated with water vapor at these conditions. Adapted from Crapo et al.2


*FEV1 values are given in liters. The values listed here reflect the FEV1 as listed in Table 5–5a minus 0.561 L (95% confidence interval). Adapted from Crapo et al.2


*DCO in mL/min/mm Hg = 0.410 H – 0.210 A – 26.31. R2 = 0.60; SEE = 4.82; 95% confidence interval = 8.2. Definitions of abbreviations: R2 = coefficient of determination; SEE = standard error of estimate; H = height in cm; A = age in years. STPD = temperature 0°C, pressure 760 mm Hg, and dry (0 water vapor). The regression analysis has been normalized to a standard hemoglobin of 146 g/L by means of Cotes' modification of the relationship described by Roughton and Forster. Adapted from Crapo and Morris.9


*DCO Values are given in mL/min/mm Hg. The values listed here reflect the DCO as listed in Table 5–6a minus 8.2 (95% confidence interval). Adapted from Crapo and Morris.9


*DCO is mL/min/mm Hg = 0.267 H – 0.148 A – 10.34. R2 = 0.60; SEE = 3.40; 95% confidence interval = 5.74. Definitions of abbreviations: R2 = coefficient of determination; SEE = standard error of estimate; H = height in cm; A = age in years. STPD = temperature 0°C, pressure 760 mm Hg, and dry (0 water vapor). The regression analysis has been normalized to a standard hemoglobin of 125 g/L (the original equation was normalized to a standard hemoglobin of 146 g/L) by means of Cotes' modification of the relationship described in Roughton and Forster. Adapted from Crapo and Morris.9

Table 5-7b Predicted Lower Limit of Normal Diffusing Capacity for Carbon Monoxide (DCO) for Women*

*DCO Values are given in mL/min/mm Hg. The values listed here reflect the DCO as listed in Table 5–7a minus 5.74 (95% confidence interval). Adapted from Crapo and Morris.9


5.4f Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing Cardiopulmonary exercise testing is sometimes use- ful in assessing whether an individual’s complaint of dyspnea (see Table 5-1) is a result of respiratory or other conditions. A person’s cardiac and conditioning status must be considered in performing the test and in interpreting the results.

The cardiopulmonary exercise gas-exchange meas- urement can be an additional means of assessing the severity and cause of exercise intolerance.
Simultaneous measurement of carbon dioxide (CO2) production, minute ventilation, and heart rate allows determination of whether exercise capacity limitation is due to cardiac, pulmonary, or coexisting impair- ments. When properly performed and interpreted, these tests can help differentiate pulmonary impair- ment from cardiac impairment or physical decondi- tioning effects.24

Exercise capacity is measured by oxygen consump- tion per unit time (V?O2) in milliliters per kilogram mul- tiplied by minutes (mL/[kg•min]) or in metabolic equivalents (METS), a unit of expended energy equal to 3.5 mL/(kg•min) oxygen consumption. MET is dis- cussed in Chapter 3 in the sections on the heart and aorta. Generally, an individual can sustain a work level equal to 40% of his or her measured maximum V?O2 for an 8-hour period.25 Table 5-8 shows the relationship between work intensity and oxygen consumption.


*Adapted from Astrand and Rodahl.26 mL/kg indicates milliliter per kilogram; L/min, liter per minute; and METS, metabolic equivalents (multiples of resting oxygen uptake).


Use cardiopulmonary exercise testing judiciously since these studies can be difficult to perform, are more expensive, and are sometimes more invasive than conventional tests. Ordinarily, exercise capacity measurements are not used to study individuals with normal results on routine pulmonary function tests. However, they can be helpful when the results of pulmonary function tests do not correlate with the

individual’s symptoms or when additional informa- tion is needed to clarify the nature and severity of an impairment.27 Do not use exercise capacity measure- ments to study individuals with medical contraindi- cations such as unstable cardiac disease.


Arterial Blood Gas Analysis
Because of its invasive nature, use arterial blood gas analysis only when necessary to evaluate pulmonary impairment. Arterial blood gas analysis results may be outside the normal range for reasons other than pulmonary disease. For most individuals with obstructive lung disease, exercise capacity correlates better with FEV1 than arterial partial pressure of oxy- gen (PO2). For purposes of evaluating permanent impairment, hypoxia must be measured on two sepa- rate occasions at least 4 weeks apart.

Pulse oximetry, which is less invasive than arterial blood gas, often provides an adequate estimate of hypoxia. Arterial blood gases, although more inva- sive, provide a more accurate measurement of hypoxia. Physicians should use their clinical judg- ment as to which measurement is needed, based on individual assessment.

An arterial blood gas determination may indicate the presence of severe impairment even when a person’s condition is stable and he or she is receiving optimal therapy. An arterial PO2 of less than 55 mm Hg is evi- dence of severe impairment when an individual is examined at rest while breathing room air at sea level. Severe impairment may also be diagnosed with an arterial PO2 of less than 60 mm Hg if the person also has one or more of the following condi- tions: pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale, increasingly severe hypoxia during exercise testing, or erythrocytosis.


5.4g Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Respiratory Disease
Table 5-12 presents criteria for estimating the perma- nent impairment rating for different respiratory con- ditions, discussed below. Perform spirometry and DCO on each person being evaluated.3 V?O2max may provide additional information in selected individuals when indicated. The person must meet all of the listed criteria except for V?O2max in order to be con- sidered nonimpaired. At least one of the listed criteria must be fulfilled to place an individual in any class with an impairment rating. As discussed in Chapter 1, in individuals where the preinjury or preillness values differ from the population-listed values, the examiner


may depart from the population-listed normal values for determining an impairment rating, using the preinjury and preillness “normal” value, and explain the reason for the departure.


5.5  Asthma
Asthma is an airway inflammatory disease character- ized by episodic and variable airflow limitation and airway hyperresponsiveness. A diagnosis of asthma requires relevant symptoms (eg, cough, sputum, wheeze, chest tightness, or breathlessness) and either evidence of airflow obstruction that is partially or completely reversible (either spontaneously or after treatment) or airway reactivity to methacholine or histamine in the absence of airflow limitation.10

Variable airflow obstruction can be detected with pulmonary function testing, which shows a reversible obstructive airway pattern. Airway hyperresponsive- ness is detected by bronchial challenge testing with methacholine or histamine.28 Airway hyperrespon- siveness is defined as a positive methacholine or histamine challenge, as reflected by a decrease in FEV1 of 20% (PC20) from baseline, upon provocation with less than or equal to 8 mg/mL of methacholine or histamine using the tidal breathing method or its equivalent.1,18 The results from methacholine testing should be expressed as the provocation concentration to cause a fall in FEV1 of 20% (PC20).
While different varieties of asthma exist, they all share an underlying commonality of airway hyper- responsiveness. Occupational asthma represents a special subset of asthma subjects. This abnormality has now surpassed pneumoconiosis as the most commonly reported occupational lung disease linked to a particular occupational environment or agent. Besides directly causing occupational asthma, work exposures can acutely exacerbate an underly- ing asthmatic condition, which can subsequently return to preexposure baseline status with removal from exposure. Work exposures can also cause a more permanent change in an underlying asthmatic condition, which can persist even after removal from exposure. If an individual’s asthma is worsen- ing at work, it is important to remove the individual from exposure or, at a minimum, reduce exposure and reevaluate his or her condition when it has

stabilized. Although prevention is optimal, medica- tion can substantially modify symptoms and the clinical course of asthma.

Occupational asthma can be caused by sensitizers or irritants. Sensitizers are classified as either high molec- ular weight or low molecular weight. High-molecular- weight sensitizers of animal or plant origin include animal dander or grain dust. Low-molecular-weight sensitizers, typically organic or inorganic chemicals, include diisocyanates. Sensitizers generally require a latency period for the development of immunologic responsiveness. This latency period may last from a few weeks to several years after first exposure.29

In the case of sensitizer-induced asthma (such as toluene diisocyanate or latex), there is a potential for severe exacerbation or fatality upon reexposure.
Although many individuals with occupational asthma improve after removal from exposure to either low-molecular-weight or high-molecular- weight sensitizers, more than half fail to recover completely, even after 2 or more years since the last exposure. Those who are sensitized to occupational agents ideally should discontinue further exposure. Both the individual and his or her physician need to monitor the course of asthmatic symptoms, espe- cially if ongoing exposure occurs. Many can be iden- tified as having a particular type of asthma. For those who have allergic asthma, exercise-induced and irri- tant-induced components may be identified as well.

Irritant-induced asthma, known as reactive airways dysfunction syndrome (RADS), may result from a single high-level exposure to a highly irritating gas, fume, mist, or vapor. The diagnosis of RADS requires (1) inhalation exposure to an acutely irritat- ing concentration of a substance, (2) onset of symp- toms (cough, wheezing cough, or dyspnea) within 24 hours after exposure with persistent respiratory symptoms, and (3) functional abnormalities (airway hyperresponsiveness) for more than 3 months, with no preexisting respiratory disease.30

Irritant-induced asthma often improves with time; some people may resume their former employment. However, some individuals experience persistent res- piratory impairment. Individual assessment is impor- tant because reducing the degree and duration of exposure may control symptoms in some people, but complete removal from exposure may be necessary to control symptoms in others.


Occupational and nonoccupational asthma impair- ment evaluations follow the same guidelines. Both require a thorough review of current occupational and home environments and the likelihood of similar exposures in subsequent workplaces. When assessing impairment due to asthma, information is needed from both clinical and physiologic parameters. The AMA recommends that the examiner follow ATS guidelines when assessing asthma impairment and include measurements of pulmonary mechanics, airway hyperresponsiveness, and medication require- ments.1 Table 5-9 lists the criteria for impairment evaluation for asthma severity. The examiner evalu- ates the indices listed, including the minimum med- ication needed to control the individual’s asthma.

Before performing an impairment rating for asthma, the examiner needs to determine that the pattern of asthma is clinically stable and well treated, based upon fulfilling the objectives of treatment as detailed by the expert panel report of the National Asthma Education Program.18,31 The objectives of treatment are: (1) to achieve control or the best overall results (least symptoms, least need for ß-adrenergic agonists when taken only if required, best expiratory flow rates, least diurnal variation of flow rates, and least side effects from medication); (2) to use the mini- mum amount of medication to maintain control or the best overall results; and (3) to treat exacerbations early to prevent them from becoming severe.

In 1993, the ATS developed guidelines for the evalu- ation of impairment and/or disability in individuals with asthma.1 According to the ATS statement, asthma necessitated special guidelines because of its distinct features, including: (1) variable airflow obstruction and change in clinical status over time;
(2) partial or complete reversibility of airflow obstruction with therapy; (3) nonspecific airway hyperresponsiveness to irritants such as dusts, gases, fumes, or smoke; and (4) sensitization to occupa- tional agents producing airway inflammation that with repeated exposure may become chronic and irreversible.

In assessing an individual with suspected asthma, if the prebronchodilator FEV1 is above the lower limit of normal, use methacholine challenge to assess air- way responsiveness. The degree of airway hyper- responsiveness and scoring are illustrated in Table
5-9. If the prebronchodilator FEV1 is below the lower limit of normal, the degree of reversibility is assessed with inhaled bronchodilators (see Table 5-9 for scoring).

To perform the evaluation at a state of maximal med- ical improvement, choose the optimal drug treatment to minimize symptoms. The type and extent of nec- essary medication is one measure of impairment severity (see Table 5-9 for scoring). Use of medica- tion, as a score for impairment, is only used in indi- viduals who have a diagnosis of asthma.

The scores for postbronchodilator FEV1, reversibility of FEV1 (or PC20), and medication use are added to obtain a summary score for respiratory impairment (see Table 5-10). ATS criteria do not assign impair- ment percentages. If an impairment percentage is needed, refer to Table 5-10, which assigns impair- ment classes and percentages to an asthma score. The authors of this chapter have assigned these impair- ment percentages according to the ATS criteria, based on their clinical judgment. In determining the percent impairment for a particular class, the examiner needs to consider how the person’s asthma affects the abil- ity to perform activities of daily living.


*FEV1 indicates forced expiratory volume in the first second; PC20 is the provocative concentration that causes a 20% fall in FEV1. Add the scores for postbronchodilator FEV1, reversibility of FEV1 (or PC20), and medication use to obtain a summary severity score for rating respiratory impairment.

†When FEV1 is greater than the lower limit of normal, PC20 should be determined and used for rating of impairment; when FEV1 is less than 70% of the predicted, the degree of reversibility should be used; and when FEV1 is between 70% of the predicted and the lower limit of normal, either reversibility or PC20 can be used. The score for minimum medication use is added to the appropriate measurement criteria outlined above.

‡Need for minimum medication should be demonstrated by the treating physician, for example, through previous records of exacerbation when medications have been reduced. Adapted from ATS guidelines.1


*The impairment rating is calculated as the sum of the individual’s scores from Table 5-9. FEV1 indicates forced expiratory volume in the first second.


5.6 Obstructive Sleep
	Apnea
Individuals with obstructive sleep apnea experience intermittent, repetitive occlusions of the upper air- way during sleep, when the pharyngeal muscles are relaxed. These occlusion periods produce airflow cessation at the nose and mouth that leads to progres- sive hypoxia, which then causes arousal from sleep. The affected person awakens briefly and reestab- lishes airway patency, resuming airflow with a loud snore or snorting sound. Because of recurrent awak- enings during the night, there is disrupted sleep architecture, without restful sleep. Symptoms of sleep apnea include a history of loud snoring, unsat- isfactory sleep pattern, daytime somnolence, cogni- tive dysfunction, and hypertension. Between 60% and 90% are obese and may have a large neck cir- cumference. When the disorder is severe, erythrocy- tosis, pulmonary hypertension, and cor pulmonale may result.

Even if total occlusion of the upper airway does not occur during sleep, partial obstruction can lead to sig- nificant reduction in airflow and produce obstructive hypopnea, which causes oxyhemoglobin saturation reduction and similar clinical and physiologic abnor- malities as seen in obstructive sleep apnea.

A variant of obstructive sleep apnea is the obesity hypoventilation syndrome. The weight of the chest wall in morbidly obese individuals may limit respira- tory movements during sleep and wakefulness. As a result, both hypoxia and hypercapnia persist through- out the day as well as during sleep. The same physio- logic consequences occur in these individuals as in those with obstructive sleep apnea. In fact, obstruc- tive sleep apnea and obesity hypoventilation syn- drome may coexist in the same person.

People affected by obstructive sleep apnea are at sig- nificantly increased risk of being involved in motor vehicle collisions. Severe daytime somnolence may prevent them from functioning adequately. Subtle changes in neuropsychological function include memory abnormalities and worsened motor coordina- tion and mood that may affect the person’s daily life.


A diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea is confirmed by nocturnal polysomnography in an accredited sleep laboratory. Once the diagnosis has been estab- lished, prescribe continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) through a nasal device for use during sleep to maintain upper airway patency. Weight loss is the most effective means of long-term management and a possible cure for obstructive sleep apnea if a lower body mass index can be maintained.32

Grading obstructive sleep apnea severity depends on the number of apnea/hypopnea episodes observed in polysomnography and the severity of hypoxia caused by these episodes. There are no standard, well- documented criteria for determining the level of impairment based on the results of polysomnography. For purposes of impairment rating as discussed in this chapter, refer to the judgment of a sleep specialist.


5.7 Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis


Hypersensitivity pneumonitis, also known as extrin- sic allergic alveolitis, is a granulomatous interstitial and bronchiolar lung disease caused by immune sen- sitization to organic dusts and some low-molecular- weight chemical antigens. A wide variety of antigenic substances are known to cause this disease. The acute disease is characterized by the onset of respiratory and constitutional symptoms beginning
4 to 8 hours after exposure to the offending material. Symptoms include chest tightness, cough, dyspnea, fever, chills, malaise, and myalgias. Pulmonary func- tion tests in the acute phase of the disease show vol- ume restriction and decreased diffusing capacity.
Hypoxia may be demonstrated by pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas testing. Chest radiographs may be normal but often show diffuse micronodular changes in the pulmonary parenchyma. When the person is removed from exposure, the symptoms, physiologic changes, and chest radiographic abnormalities begin to resolve within 1 to 2 days, although they may take 4 to 6 weeks for complete resolution.

In the subacute and chronic presentations of hyper- sensitivity pneumonitis, the predominant symptoms include exertional dyspnea and cough; some report sputum production, anorexia, fatigue, and weight loss. Pulmonary function studies often show mixed restriction and obstruction with isolated obstructive changes in some individuals. With repeated expo- sures, pulmonary fibrotic changes may occur as the abnormalities become chronic and irreversible.33


Permanently restrict individuals with hypersensitiv- ity pneumonitis from exposure to the sensitizing agent. If pulmonary fibrosis has not supervened, nor- mal pulmonary function may be reestablished.
However, the onset of pulmonary fibrosis is likely to produce respiratory impairment and may limit other types of employment. Once the acute episode has resolved and the condition is stable, the examiner may rate the degree of permanent impairment according to the criteria given in Table 5-12.

Asthma, pneumoconiosis, and hypersensitivity pneu- monitis may require that the person refrain from working in a specific occupational setting where he or she is exposed to the offending agent. If reassigned where no ongoing exposure occurs, the individual may not have a permanent respiratory impairment.

5.9 Lung Cancer
All persons with lung cancer are severely impaired at diagnosis. At reevaluation 1 year after the diagnosis is established, if the person is found to be free of all evidence of tumor recurrence, then he or she is eval- uated according to criteria listed in Table 5-12. If there is still evidence of tumor, the he or she is con- sidered to be severely impaired (class 4 impairment); if the tumor recurs, the person will also be consid- ered to be severely impaired (class 4 impairment).
Table 5-11 (the Karnofsky scale), specifically devel- oped to describe the capabilities of individuals with cancer, may be used to further describe the capabili- ties of a person with lung cancer and enable catego- rization within a particular class.


5.8 Pneumoconiosis
Pneumoconiosis is a term used to describe diseases resulting from the inhalation of mineral dusts such as silica, coal, and asbestos, and metals such as cobalt and beryllium. The radiologic and pathologic pat- terns of pneumoconiosis from these dusts are usually quite distinct and beyond the scope of this chapter.
Latency between exposure to these dusts and devel- opment of disease varies, but disease can occur any- where from 10 up to 30 years after initial exposure.34


The severity of impairment related to pneumoconiosis depends on the characteristics of the specific dust inhaled, the dust burden retained in the lungs, the sus- ceptibility of the individual, and the length of time since first exposure. Under some circumstances, the parenchymal changes on chest radiograph may be progressive even after removal from exposure and may or may not be associated with physiologic impairment. Persons who develop pneumoconiosis should limit further exposure to the offending agent, particularly if radiographic changes have occurred at a relatively young age or if there is associated physio- logic impairment. However, these individuals may be capable of working at other jobs where the offending dust is not present. See Table 5-12 for criteria for assessment of impairment due to pneumoconiosis.


Adapted from Moossa et al.35


5.10 Permanent
Impairment Due to Respiratory
	Disorders
Table 5-12 lists criteria for estimating the permanent impairment rating due to respiratory disorders, using pulmonary function and exercise test results.
Perform spirometry and DCO on each person being evaluated.3 V?O2max may provide additional informa- tion in selected individuals when indicated.
Determine the predicted values for FVC, FEV1, and DCO using Tables 5-2a through 5-7a, and calculate the percent predicted (observed/predicted value).
Determine the lower limit of normal for FVC, FEV1, and DCO using Tables 5-2b through 5-7b. The person must meet all of the listed criteria except for V?O2max in order to be considered nonimpaired. At least one of the listed criteria must be fulfilled to place an indi- vidual in any class with an impairment rating. As discussed in Chapter 1, in individuals where the preinjury or preillness values differ from the popula- tion-listed values, the examiner may depart from the


population-listed normal values for determining an impairment rating, using the preinjury and preillness “normal” value, and explain the reason for the departure.

The classification system in Table 5-12 considers only pulmonary function measurements for an impairment rating. It is recognized that pulmonary impairment can occur that does not significantly impact pulmonary function and exercise test results but that does impact the ability to perform activities of daily living, such as with bronchiectasis.

In these limited cases, the physician may assign an impairment rating based on the extent and severity of pulmonary dysfunction and the inability to perform activities of daily living (see Table 1-2). Measured losses of pulmonary function, and corresponding impairment classes, result in a loss in the ability to perform some activities of daily living. The physi- cian can use these associations as a reference. A detailed description with supporting, objective docu- mentation of the type of pulmonary impairment and its impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living is required.


*FVC indicates forced vital capacity; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in the first second; DCO, diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide; V?O2max, maximum oxygen consumption; and METS, metabolic equivalents (multiples of resting oxygen uptake). DCO is primarily of value for persons with restrictive lung disease. In classes 2 and 3, if FVC, FEV1, and FEV1/FVC are normal and DCO is between 41% and 79%, then an exercise test is required to determine level of impairment.

†Refer to Crapo RO, Morris AH, Gardner RM for the lower limit of normal for FEV1 / FVC.2


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 5-1
0% Impairment Due to Chronic Bronchitis
Subject: 40-year-old man.
History: Foundry worker for 21 years; nonsmoker.
Current Symptoms: Daily productive cough for several years; on most days for 3 consecutive months; no dyspnea on exertion.
Physical Exam: Height: 188 cm (6 ft 2 in); weight
95.3 kg (210 lb).
Clinical Studies: Scattered rhonchi in both lungs. Chest radiograph: normal. FVC (L): observed
5.67; predicted 5.77; observed/predicted 98%.
FEV1 (L): observed 4.51; predicted 4.62; observed/predicted 98%. FEV1/FVC: observed 79.5%. DCO: observed/predicted 91%.
Diagnosis: Chronic bronchitis.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Pulmonary function tests normal. If ear- lier pulmonary function tests available, compari- son with current results recommended.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 5-2
0% Impairment Due to Respiratory Disease
Subject: 50-year-old man.
History: Delivery truck driver for 25 years; hospital- ized for anteroseptal myocardial infarction 3 months earlier; returned to work. Progressive exercise program. Smoker: 35 pack-year history.
Current Symptoms: Shortness of breath carrying three boxes up a flight of stairs. Allowed to return to work after beginning a progressive exercise program.
Physical Exam: Height: 188 cm (6 ft 2 in); weight
86.4 kg (190 lb). Normal breath sounds and cardiac examination.

Clinical Studies: Chest radiograph: left ventricle enlargement; normal lungs. FVC (L): observed
5.28; predicted 5.56; observed/predicted 95%.
FEV1 (L): observed 3.85; predicted 4.37; observed/predicted 88%. FEV1/FVC: observed 73%. DCO: 91%. V?O2: 18 mL/kg.
Diagnosis: Inadequate cardiac output resulting from myocardial infarction.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person based on respiratory function alone.
Comment: Pulmonary function studies indicate class 1 and no respiratory impairment. See Guides Chapters 3 and 4 to determine cardiovascular sys- tem impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 5-3
10% to 25% Impairment Due to Respiratory Disease


Subject: 54-year-old man.
History: Retired power plant mechanic; routine asbestos exposure from ages 18 to 37. Currently 10-year nonsmoker; previous 24 pack-year history of smoking.
Current Symptoms: Dyspnea when walking on level ground with others his age.
Physical Exam: Height 175 cm (5 ft 9 in); weight 115 kg (253 lb). Auscultation: shortened expira- tory phase; no crackles or wheezes. Diminished posterior breath sounds at both lung bases.
Clinical Studies: On radiograph: moderately exten- sive focal pleural thickening; diffuse pleural thick- ening of left lateral chest wall extending into left costophrenic angle. Calcified pleural plaque in left hemidiaphragm. No interstitial changes. FVC (L): observed 3.00; predicted 4.69; observed/pre- dicted 64%. FEV1 (L): observed 2.43; predicted
3.74; observed/predicted 65%. FEV1/FVC:
observed 81%. DCO: observed/predicted 78%.


Diagnosis: Diffuse asbestos-related pleural changes with restrictive physiology. No evidence of parenchymal asbestosis.
Impairment Rating: 10% to 25% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Diffuse pleural fibrosis may cause per- manent restrictive impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 5-4
10% to 25% Impairment Due to Respiratory Disease

Subject: 58-year-old woman.
History: Teacher; several years’ daily cough with morning sputum production. Smoked 1.5 packs per day from ages 16 to 58. No asthma, pneumo- nia, or exposure to hazardous dusts, chemicals, or fumes.
Current Symptoms: Some wheezing, especially with colds. No dyspnea, chest pain, or hemoptysis.
Physical Exam: Height: 168 cm (5 ft 6 in); weight: 61 kg (135 lb). Forced exhalation expiratory wheeze.
Clinical Studies: Chest radiograph: normal. FVC (L): observed 2.73; predicted 3.41;
observed/predicted 80%. FEV1 (L): observed 1.83;
predicted 2.69; observed/predicted 68%. FEV1/FVC: observed 67%. DCO: observed/pre-
dicted 73%. V?O2max: 20 mL/kg/min.
Diagnosis: Chronic bronchitis with mild airflow obstruction.
Impairment Rating: 10% to 25% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Mild airflow obstruction caused by ciga- rette smoking.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 5-5
10% to 25% Impairment Due to Respiratory Disease

Subject: 48-year-old man.
History: Dairy farmer; various hospitalizations for pneumonia. No cardiovascular disease, asthma, or cigarette smoking. Works with hay stored in barn; particularly dusty during winter.
Current Symptoms: Persistent nonproductive cough; short of breath on exertion.

Physical Exam: Height: 177 cm (5 ft 10 in); weight: 77 kg (170 lb). Persistent bilateral end-inspiratory crackles in posterior and lateral bases.
Clinical Studies: Chest radiograph: diffuse fibrotic process throughout both lung fields. Prior radi- ographs: no change over 5 years. FVC (L): observed 3.47; predicted 4.99; observed/predicted
70%. FEV1 (L): observed 2.69; predicted 4.00; observed/predicted 67%. FEV1/FVC: observed 78%. DCO: observed/predicted 64%. V?O2max: 20 mL/kg/min.
Diagnosis: Hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
Impairment Rating: 10% to 25% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Pulmonary function impairment; perma- nently restrict exposure to moldy hay.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 5-6
10% to 25% Impairment Due to Respiratory Disease


Subject: 25-year-old man.
History: Self-employed auto body worker; no previ- ous history of asthma. Had been spray painting for 5 years with paints containing hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI), one of the asthma-causing diisocyanates. Admitted to the hospital with wheezing; a diagnosis of asthma was made; was started on asthma medications. After 2 years of avoidance of HDI, while compliantly following medication regimen of high-dose inhaled cortico- steroids and, as needed, beta-agonist bronchodila- tor, minimum medication need score was 3.
Current Symptoms: Exercise-related and nocturnal coughing and wheezing.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Spirometry without bronchodila- tors and diffusing capacity: normal, but a metha- choline challenge test showed airway hyperreactivity with PC20 methacholine of 5 mg/mL (score 1).
Diagnosis: Occupational asthma due to HDI.
Impairment Rating: Asthma score (Table 5-9): 4; 10% to 25% impairment of the whole person (Table 5-10).
Comment: No further exposure to diisocyanates is recommended.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 5-7
26% to 50% Impairment Due to Respiratory Disease

Subject: 60-year-old man.
History: Insulator for 40 years; mixed powdered asbestos with water and applied it to pipes and steel beams for first 20 years. Denies cough, wheezing, or chest pain. Nonsmoker. No asthma, pneumonia, or other medical disorders. No med- ications.
Current Symptoms: Increasing dyspnea for 5 years; difficulty keeping up with others the same age.
Unable to walk upstairs past second flight.
Physical Exam: Height: 170 cm (5 ft 7 in); weight:
70.5 kg (155 lb). Questionable finger clubbing; bilateral end-inspiratory crackles at lung bases. Cardiac examination: normal.
Clinical Studies: Chest radiograph: moderately pro- nounced, small, linear, irregular opacities at lung bases; small, bilateral pleural plaques. FVC (L): observed 2.35; predicted 4.27; observed/predicted
55%. FEV1 (L): observed 2.10; predicted 3.38; observed/predicted 62%. FEV1/FVC: observed 89%. DCO: observed 16.0; predicted 30.8; observed/predicted 52%. V?O2max: 16 mL/kg/min.
Diagnosis: Asbestosis and asbestos-related pleural plaques.
Impairment Rating: 26% to 50% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Interstitial lung disease with crackles, decreased vital capacity, and decreased gas exchange. Decreased oxygen uptake probably due to pulmonary dysfunction.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 5-8
26% to 50% Impairment Due to Asthma


Subject: 33-year-old woman.
History: Natural rubber latex glove inspector for
7 years; no prior history of asthma, but history of eczema. When away from work, symptoms per- sisted, exacerbated by weather changes, anxiety, or moderate exercise. Symptoms were less severe than when working with latex.
Current Symptoms: Episodic cough, shortness of breath, chest tightness, and occasional wheezing, with symptom onset within 10 minutes of onset of work and persistent throughout the day. Job involved testing surgical latex gloves for leaks by inflating with compressed air, which released cornstarch glove powder into the air. Symptoms improved, but did not resolve, while on a 12-day vacation.
Physical Exam: Diffuse wheezing.
Clinical Studies: Chest x-ray: normal. Spirometry: showed postbronchodilator FEV1 68% (score 2), with a 20% change in FEV1 (score 2). During fol- low-up 3 months later, she was still on daily
low-dose inhaled corticosteroids, with daily bron- chodilator use (score 2).
Diagnosis: Latex-induced occupational asthma.
Impairment Rating: Asthma impairment score: 6 based on spirometry results and medication use; 26%-50% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Individual was given a work restriction to avoid all future exposure to natural rubber latex because of latex allergy and asthma.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 5-9
51% to 100% Impairment Due to Asthma

Subject: 40-year-old man.
History: Golf course groundskeeper for 15 years; lifelong asthma. 2 years’ increasing dyspnea with mild exertion; intermittent cough. Nonsmoker. No symptom improvement over weekends. Has been on at least 20 mg of prednisone per day for past year (score 4).
Physical Exam: Height: 180 cm (5 ft 11 in); weight: 70 kg (154 lb). Diffuse expiratory wheezing over entire chest. No clubbing, cyanosis, or lower extremity edema. Cardiac examination: no air trapping.
Clinical Studies: Chest radiograph: no cardiopul- monary disease. Post bronchodilator FVC (L): observed 2.94; predicted 5.2 observed/predicted 57%; post bronchodilator FEV1 (L): observed
1.16; predicted 4.29 observed/predicted 27%
(score 4); change post bronchodilator 22%
(score 2). FEV1/FVC: observed 39%. Methacholine challenge test: not performed; severe baseline obstruction.
Impairment Rating: Asthma score: 10 (Tables 5-9 and 5-10); 51% to 100% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Pulmonary function studies demonstrate a significant response to bronchodilators but per- sistent severe airway obstruction. The persistent FEV1 percentage ? 50% of predicted with pro- longed use of daily oral prednisone would in itself result in class 4 impairment rating for asthma.
Severe symptoms require frequent oral steroids.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 5-10
51% to 100% Impairment Due to Emphysema


Subject: 62-year-old man.
History: Bookkeeper in vegetable-processing plant for 38 years; 10 years’ gradual shortness of breath: smoked 2.5 packs of cigarettes per day for 50 years (125 pack-years); quit 6 months ago. No other disorders or exposure to hazardous dusts, chemicals, or fumes.
Current Symptoms: Severe dyspnea; unable to per- form activities of daily living (driving to/from work, walking on level ground, self-dress).
Occasional nonproductive cough; no wheezing, chest pain, or hemoptysis.
Physical Exam: Height: 180 cm (5 ft 11 in); weight:
69.5 kg (153 lb). Distant breath sounds; no crack- les or wheezes.
Clinical Studies: Chest radiograph: hyperinflated lungs; pulmonary parenchyma vascular attenua- tion. FVC (L): observed 2.94; predicted 4.82; observed/predicted 61%. FEV1 (L): observed 1.16;
predicted 3.75; observed/predicted 31%.
FEV1/FVC: 39%. DCO: observed 12.87; predicted
34.5; observed/predicted 37%. V?O2max: 10 mL/kg/min.
Diagnosis: Emphysema.
Impairment Rating: 51% to 100% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Severe emphysema; unlikely to perform any significant exertion without hypoxia.
---END EXAMPLE---

5.11 Respiratory Impairment Evaluation
    Summary
See Table 5–13 for an evaluation summary for the assessment of permanent impairment due to repira- tory disorders.






================================================================================
Chapter 6: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Digestive System
6.1 Principles of Assessment
6.2 Upper Digestive Tract
6.3 Colon, Rectum, and Anus
6.4 Enterocutaneous Fistulas
6.5 Liver and Biliary Tract
6.6 Hernias
6.7 Digestive System Impairment Evaluation Summary
Introduction

This chapter provides criteria for evaluating perma- nent impairment of the digestive system, consisting of the alimentary canal, liver, biliary tract, and pan- creas. The criteria for assigning permanent impair- ment ratings of digestive system disease include clinically established or objectively determined devi- ations from normal in the transport and assimilation of ingested food, nutrition metabolism, waste prod- uct excretion, and the effect of these problems on individuals’ performance of activities of daily living.


117


The following sections have been revised from the fourth edition: (1) impairment from ulcer disease has been revised since most duodenal and gastric ulcer disease cases can be eradicated with treatment of
H. pylori infection, and bleeding ulcer treatment has improved with injection or heat therapy, in some cases avoiding gastric resection; (2) orthotopic liver transplantation has reclaimed the lives of many end- stage liver disease patients and significantly reduced the degree of permanent impairment; (3) parenteral nutrition and, in particular, home nutrition programs have completely rehabilitated some and improved the daily lives of many individuals with intestinal failure from a variety of causes; (4) new techniques for improving biliary drainage prevent or delay irre- versible liver damage; (5) continued experience with intestinal anastomosis and stomas provides a greater sense of security and self-esteem, improves overall function, and reduces the degree of permanent impairment in some people. Impairments of similar gravity, which have similar impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living for the small and large intestine, have been given the same impairment ratings for comparable classes.


6.1 Principles of Assessment

Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for per- forming and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

6.1a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Some impairment classes refer to symptoms that limit the ability to perform daily activities. When this information is subjective and possible to misinterpret, it should not serve as the sole criterion for assigning impairment ratings. Rather, the examiner should obtain objective data about the limitation’s extent and integrate those findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent impairment.

Esophageal impairment signs and symptoms include dysphagia, pyrosis or heartburn, retrosternal pain, regurgitation, bleeding, and weight loss. Note that occasional, minor dyspepsia, gas, and belching are within the experience of all individuals.

Stomach and duodenum impairment symptoms and signs include nausea, vomiting, pain, bleeding, obstruction, diarrhea, weight loss, and certain types of malabsorption. Some impairments may produce nutritional deficiencies that lead to hematologic and neurologic manifestations, which would be rated separately and combined with digestive system impairments.

Small intestine impairment symptoms and signs include abdominal pain, diarrhea, steatorrhea, bleed- ing, obstruction, and weight loss, which often are associated with general debility and other extra- intestinal manifestations.

Pancreatic function impairment symptoms and signs include, but are not limited to, pain, anorexia, nau- sea, vomiting, diarrhea, steatorrhea, weight loss, muscle wasting, jaundice, diabetes mellitus, and debility. Impairment due to endocrine disturbance related to the pancreas is considered in the Guides chapter on the endocrine system (Chapter 10).

Colon, rectum, and anus impairment symptoms and signs include abdominal, pelvic, or perineal pain; disordered bowel action; tenesmus; fecal inconti- nence; bleeding; suppuration; and the appearance of hemorrhoids, fissures, and fistulas. Systemic mani- festations may include fever, weight loss, debility, and anemia.

Hepatobiliary impairment symptoms and signs include pain, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, loss of strength and stamina, reduced resistance to infection, altered immune response, jaundice, and pruritus.
Advanced liver disease complications include edema and generalized ascites, portal hypertension leading to esophageal varices and hemorrhage, and meta- bolic disturbances leading to hepatic encephalopathy and renal failure.


Abdominal wall impairment symptoms and signs include typically intermittent discomfort or pain at or near the herniation site, often associated with pos- tural changes or increased abdominal pressure; visi- ble or palpable protrusion or swelling at the herniation site, often appearing and disappearing with abdominal pressure; and more acute and intense pain due to complications, especially incarceration and strangulation of contained bowel or omentum.

Incisional hernias may be unsightly and annoying; other symptoms, if any, tend to be related to the incisional hernia size. Inguinal and femoral hernias typically are painful and entail a greater risk of incarceration or strangulation. Most abdominal wall hernias are amenable to surgical correction.
6.1b Description of Clinical Studies Objective procedures useful in establishing esophageal impairment include, but are not limited to: (1) imaging procedures, such as fluoroscopy and radiography employing contrast media, and com- puted tomography (CT); (2) peroral endoscopy, including cytologic study or biopsy; and (3) func- tional tests, such as manometry or intraesophageal pH measurement.

Objective procedures useful in establishing stomach and duodenum impairment include, but are not lim- ited to: (1) imaging techniques, such as fluoroscopy and roentgenography with contrast media, scintigra- phy, and CT; (2) peroral endoscopy, with biopsy and cytologic study; (3) gastric secretory tests; (4) mal- absorption tests; (5) stool examination; and (6) urea breath test for H. pylori.

Objective procedures useful in establishing impair- ment of the small intestine include, but are not lim- ited to: (1) fluoroscopy and roentgenography employing contrast media; (2) peroral endoscopy and mucosal biopsy; and (3) intestinal malabsorption testing measures such as fecal fat content and urinary d-xylose excretion tests, carbon 14 breath test, and Schilling test.

Objective procedures useful in establishing impair- ment of pancreatic function include, but are not lim- ited to: (1) ultrasonography; (2) radiography, including plain or scout films of the abdomen, CT, and endoscopic pancreatography; (3) guided, fine- needle aspiration; (4) determination of plasma glu- cose level and glucose tolerance; (5) assay of pancreatic enzyme activity in blood, urine, and feces;
(6) sweat electrolyte test; and (7) procedures such as the secretin test.

Objective procedures useful in establishing colon, rectum, and anus impairment include, but are not limited to: (1) digital and endoscopic examination, including anoscopy, proctoscopy, sigmoidoscopy, and colonoscopy; (2) biopsy; (3) fecal microscopy and culture; and (4) fluoroscopy and roentgenogra- phy employing contrast media.

Objective procedures useful in establishing hepatobil- iary impairment include, but are not limited to: (1) ultrasonography; (2) contrast radiography, such as percutaneous and endoscopic cholangiography; (3) CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); (4) nucleide scintigraphy; (5) angiography; (6) liver biopsy and
fine-needle aspiration; and (7) laboratory tests to assess the bile ducts and various liver functions.

Objective procedures useful in establishing impair- ment by hernias include, but are not limited to:
(1) abdominal wall physical examination and
(2) imaging by roentgenography or CT scan with or without contrast media.
6.1 c Desirable Weight
Weight loss is an essential criterion for evaluating the severity and consequences of gastrointestinal disorders. To determine impairment resulting from digestive disorders, desirable weight may be defined as follows:

1. If possible, the examiner should determine by his- tory or from previous medical records a weight that predates the individual’s digestive disorder that is considered usual and customary. The exam- iner should use that weight as the desirable weight from which any deviation is measured.

2. If the examiner is not able to determine by history or previous medical records a usual and custom- ary weight that predates the disorder, then the examiner should refer to a table of desirable weights and calculate deviations from the lower end of the table’s range that corresponds to the individual’s gender, height, and body build.


*Copyright © 1996, 1999, The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company. Courtesy Statistical Bulletin, Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.

*Copyright © 1996, 1999, The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company. Courtesy Statistical Bulletin, Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.


Tables 6-1 and 6-2 present desirable weights accord- ing to height for men and women, respectively. For an obese person, the usual preimpairment weight may not be as physiologically desirable as the current weight. Thus, the examiner should use his
or her clinical judgment when assessing the relative importance of weight loss.
6.1 d Impairment Determination
Impairment classes, as listed in Tables 6-3 through 6-9, are organ- and system-specific. The impairment classes and percentage ratings reflect anatomic, physiological, and functional abnormalities at the organ and system level and the ability to perform activities of daily living (see Table 1-2). A gastroin- testinal system impairment evaluation falling within
normal range reflects an individual who performs all activities of daily living with only normal, occasional gastrointestinal symptoms; no limitation of activities; no special diet; and no required medication, with adequate reserve capacity that allows the body to obtain the required nutrition and maintain normal weight.

For the purposes of impairment ratings, the upper digestive tract has been defined to include the esoph- agus, stomach and duodenum, small intestine, and pancreas. Impairment criteria and classes have been combined for the colon and rectum; anal; liver and biliary impairments; and hernia impairments.


6.2 Upper Digestive Tract (Esophagus, Stomach and Duodenum, Small Intestine, and
	Pancreas)
6.2 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Upper Digestive Tract Disease
Criteria for evaluating impairments related to upper digestive tract disease are given in Table 6-3.


*Refer to Tables 6-1 and 6-2.

Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The original hiatal hernia and motility disorder have neither interfered with normal nutrition nor impaired ability to perform usual daily activities.1
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-1
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Upper Digestive Tract Disease

Subject: 44-year-old man.
History: Machinist; transient difficulty swallowing; first occurrence 9 months ago while eating broiled lobster.
Current Symptoms: No symptoms of esophageal disease.
Physical Exam: Within normal limits. Weight:
68.1 kg (150 lb); height: 1.78 m (5 ft 10 in); within desirable limits. Healthy appearance; vital signs normal.
Clinical Studies: Chest roentgenogram, ECG: nor- mal. Barium swallow: small, sliding hiatal hernia. Endoscopy: no mucosal defect.
Diagnosis: Hiatal hernia, uncomplicated.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-2
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Stomach or Duodenum Disease or Injury

Subject: 28-year-old man.
History: 5 years’ epigastric pain and burning.
Minimal weight loss.
Current Symptoms: Denied nausea, vomiting, hematemesis, or melena. Painful episodes last up to 2 weeks, wake him at night, and require antacids, food, and over-the-counter (OTC) H blockers for relief. Avoided all ulcerogenic drugs.
Physical Exam: Height: 1.8 m (5 ft 11 in); weight:
72.6 kg (160 lb).
Clinical Studies: Barium meal: deformed duodenal bulb. No gastric retention or pyloric stenosis.
Peroral endoscopy: scar of healed ulcer on posterior wall on first portion of duodenum. Endoscopy: 1-cm duodenum ulcer-crater; consid- erable surrounding deformity. Antral biopsies: positive for H. pylori; full-course triple-therapy (omeprazole, clarithromycin, and metronidazole) relieved symptoms. Complete healing at follow- up endoscopy 8 weeks later. Repeat antrum and body biopsies: no H. pylori.


Diagnosis: Resolved peptic duodenal ulcer disease associated with H. pylori infection.
Impairment Rating: 0% if remission continues.
Comment: H. pylori can be found in 95% to 100% of duodenal ulcer and 70% to 80% of peptic stom- ach ulcer patients. Successful eradication of infec- tion induces a long remission.2
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-3
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Small Intestine Disease

Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: Abdominal operation because of recurrent and protracted fever, abdominal pain, and disten- tion 10 years ago. Approximately 30-cm resection of terminal ileum and ileoascending colostomy construction. Resected specimen histologic find- ings consistent with regional enteritis (Crohn’s disease).
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic. Has two or three soft stools daily. Performs all activities of daily living without difficulty.
Physical Exam: Weight: 70.3 kg (155 lb) on unre- stricted diet; usual preillness weight: 72.6 kg (160 lb).
Clinical Studies: Hemogram and blood chemistry panel: normal. Roentgenograms of remaining small intestine and the ileocolic anastomosis: unremarkable.
Diagnosis: Partial, distal ileal resection (Crohn’s disease).
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: No symptoms to suggest intestinal dis- ease recurrence; required no therapy for 10 years after operation. Maintained nearly desirable weight; easily performed usual activities.
Resected ileum length influences postoperative morbidity. Diarrhea, some malabsorption more likely when 100 cm or more resected; may neces-
sitate reduced fat intake and regular vitamin B
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-4
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Pancreatic Disease


Subject: 40-year-old woman.
History: Bartender; episodic epigastric pain associ- ated with elevated serum amylase activity,
two to three episodes per year for 3 years. Cholecystectomy for gallstones removal 2 years ago. Reduced-calorie diet corrected exogenous obesity; weight did not fall below desirable level.
Current Symptoms: Pain attacks, especially after large meals or immoderate alcoholic beverage consumption.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: No clinical or laboratory evidence of pancreatic insufficiency.
Diagnosis: Recurrent acute pancreatitis.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Preexisting disease appropriately docu- mented and treated. No evidence of residual pan- creatic impairment. Individual able to perform normal daily activities despite occasional recur- ring symptoms.3
---END EXAMPLE---
12
injections, increasing impairment to 10% or more.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-5
10% to 24% Impairment Due to Upper Digestive Tract Disease

Subject: 59-year-old woman.
History: 5 years’ almost daily retrosternal pain asso- ciated with difficulty swallowing.
Current Symptoms: Symptoms less severe when diet limited to soft foods; symptoms aggravated when upset, particularly when worried.
Physical Exam: Height: 1.7 m (5 ft 7 in), medium frame; weight: 53.6 kg (118 lb), within 10% of usual weight of 58 kg (128 lb). BP: 145/90 mm Hg. Appears older than stated age.
Clinical Studies: Chest roentgenogram, ECG: normal; uncoordinated contractions in lower esophagus resulting in “corkscrew” configuration, indicative of diffuse spasm. Esophageal manome- try: prolonged high amplitude, irregular synchro- nous contractions with water swallowing consistent with diffuse spasm. Endoscopy: no mucosal defect.
Diagnosis: Diffuse spasm of the esophagus.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Persistent symptoms obligated woman to restrict diet. Weight loss did not exceed 10% of desirable level. Daily activities restrained only slightly. Symptomatic management with agents such as nifedepine and diltiazem may be helpful and sufficient; if not, surgical myotomy reported beneficial in 70% to 80% of cases.4
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-6
10% to 24% Impairment Due to Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease

Subject: 43-year-old man.
History: Burning retrosternal chest distress increas- ing in severity and frequency over the last 18 months. Occurred after meals; wakened with occasional sour regurgitation into mouth and coughing episodes. Antacids helped very briefly; improvement noted with OTC histamine receptor blockers. Excellent relief with intensive doses
of omeprazole. Long-term medical therapy instituted.
Current Symptoms: Above symptoms recurred when medication stopped after 8 weeks.
Physical Exam: Unremarkable; minimal weight loss.
Clinical Studies: Blood studies: normal. X-rays
of esophagus and stomach: suggest lower esopha- gus ulceration. Endoscopy: moderately severe esophagitis; longitudinal ridging, denuded mucosa in between. Biopsy: inflamed squamous epithelium.
Diagnosis: Moderately severe gastroesophageal reflux disease without stricture.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Persistent untreated gastroesophageal reflux may result in stricture formation necessitat- ing repeated dilatations, medical therapy resump- tion. Possible antireflux surgery. Reflux may induce premalignant changes in lower esophagus; regular surveillance and possible surgical treat- ment increase impairment rating.5,6
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-7
10% to 24% Impairment Due to Duodenum Disease


Subject: 40-year-old man.
History: 10 years’ intermittent ulcer symptoms. Three bleeding episodes; twice required blood replacement. One transient pyloric obstruction episode.
Current Symptoms: Performance of daily activities repeatedly interrupted. Refuses to consider surgi- cal remedy; requires continuing medical therapy to maintain any degree of symptomatic remission.
Physical Exam: Height: 1.78 m (5 ft 8 in); weight: 59 kg (130 lb), 7% below desirable.


Clinical Studies: Upper GI tract roentgenograms: marked duodenal bulb cloverleaf deformity with 3-mm ulcer fleck.
Diagnosis: Active duodenal ulcer with a history of recurring complications.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Complicated disease; recurrent symp- toms despite medical therapy. H. pylori may be factor in chronic complicated duodenal ulcer dis- ease; should be sought and treated. Other ulcer complications, ie, bleeding, respond to injection or thermal/laser therapy; results equal to surgical treatment. Current surgical treatment reserved for ulcers intractable to intensive acid suppression therapy and extremely large duodenal or stomach ulcers.7
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-8
10% to 24% Impairment Due to Small Intestine Disease

Subject: 64-year-old woman.
History: Commercial artist; 5 years’ diarrhea, weight loss, and vague abdominal distress. All symptoms cleared with oral tetracycline and parenteral cyanocobalamin (vitamin B ). Mild diarrhea
for several weeks 2 years ago; subsided with tetra- cycline.
Current Symptoms: Normal nutritional state. No untoward symptoms; relatively unrestricted diet. Periodic intramuscular cyanocobalamin injections.
Physical Exam: Weight: 49.9 kg (110 lb); preillness weight: 54.4 kg (120 lb). Height: 1.55 m (5 ft 1 in).
Clinical Studies: Macrocytic anemia; barium meal examination: extensive small intestine diverticulosis. Roentgenographic examination: persistence of numerous diverticula in small intestine, even more prominent in jejunum.
Diagnosis: Diverticulosis of the small intestine; overgrowth of enteric bacterial flora.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment due to diver- ticulosis of the small intestine; combine with appropriate impairment estimate for anemia (see Guides Chapter 9, The Hematopoietic System) to determine whole person impairment.

Comment: Performs activities of daily living; unim- paired weight, but dependent on continuing ther- apy. Diffuse intestinal motility disorder possibly associated with small intestine diverticulosis may produce a progressively disabling condition, “intestinal pseudo-obstruction,” with abdominal distention, diarrhea, and malnutrition and with lit- tle or no response to usual therapy. Possible long- term parenteral feeding; impairment would advance to class 3 or 4.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-9
10% to 24% Impairment Due to Pancreatic Disease or Injury

Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: Thrown against steering wheel of truck when it slid off a road. Increasing abdominal pain and distention a few weeks later. Serial ultra- sonography: expanding pancreatic cyst. Subtotal pancreatectomy; cyst removed, and associated inflammatory reaction allayed.
Current Symptoms: Intermittent diarrhea, steator- rhea, and diminished stamina 15 months later, despite pancreatic enzyme supplements.
Occasional epigastric and back pain.
Physical Exam: Height: 1.9 m (6 ft 3 in); weight:
74.5 kg (164 lb); preillness weight: 81.7 kg (180 lb). No evidence of impaired glucose toler- ance or diabetes.
Clinical Studies: Blood studies: normal; modest steatorrhea.
Diagnosis: Status post-subtotal pancreatectomy con- sequent to trauma, residual chronic pancreatitis and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Impaired pancreatic exocrine function; weight maintained within 10% of desirable level. Reduced capacity to perform activities of daily living.3
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-10
25% to 49% Impairment Due to Upper Digestive Tract Disease

Subject: 49-year-old man.
History: 5 years’ intermittent retrosternal pain, dysphagia, and nocturnal regurgitation with occa- sional and partial remission.
Current Symptoms: Pain less prominent; dysphagia more troublesome. Swallows solid foods only with large volumes of liquids.
Physical Exam: Weight: 70.4 kg (155 lb); preillness weight: 81.7 kg (180 lb). Height: 1.88 m (6 ft 2 in); lanky and gaunt. Normal vital signs.
Clinical Studies: Chest roentgenogram: medi- astinum widening; no lung field densities that might indicate aspiration. Barium swallow: markedly dilated and tortuous esophagus termi- nating in filiform constriction. Endoscopy: no mucosal defect. Successful pneumatic dilation of lower esophageal sphincter after repeated attempts.
Diagnosis: Achalasia of the esophagus.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Symptoms persistent and progressive despite dietary limitation and esophageal dilation; weight loss exceeded 10% of desirable level.
Esophagomyotomy highly recommended due to individual’s age and possible combination of antireflux procedure. Basic defect in achalasia, loss of ganglion cells and nerve fibers, cannot be corrected; therapy goal to prevent progressive proximal esophageal dilation. Successful treat- ment could reduce impairment to class 2.
Progressive proximal esophageal dilation with failure or omission of treatment may result in class 4 rating.5
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-11
25% to 49% Impairment Due to Stomach or Duodenum Disease or Injury

Subject: 50-year-old woman.
History: Librarian; partial gastrectomy 2 years ago to remove focus of multiple, dysplastic, adenoma- tous polyps.
Current Symptoms: Lightheadedness, sweating, and palpitation 15 minutes after meals. Symptoms modified by dietary restriction and lying down.
Weight dropped since operation to approximately 15% below desirable.
Physical Exam: Weight: 45.4 kg (100 lb); height: 1.6 m (5 ft 3 in). Well-healed scar on upper abdomen; phys- ical examination otherwise unremarkable.
Clinical Studies: Upper GI tract roentgenograms: 70% gastric resection, patent, undistorted gastro- jejunostomy.
Diagnosis: Postgastrectomy dumping syndrome.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Symptoms interfered with performance of normal daily activities despite dietary restric- tion. Unable to maintain weight within 10% of desirable level.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-12
25% to 49% Impairment Due to Regional Enteritis


Subject: 38-year-old man.
History: Diarrhea and stamina loss. Partial resection of the distal ileum 3 years ago; evidence of regional enteritis. Several bouts of partial intes- tinal obstruction, each subsiding with supportive therapy. Required no surgical reintervention.
Dietary restriction, vitamin supplements, antidiar- rheal agents, and occasional corticosteroid ther- apy needed to help sustain adequate health state.
Current Symptoms: Episode diarrhea and abdomi- nal cramps.
Physical Exam: Height: 1.6 m (5 ft 3 in); weight:
49.9 kg (110 lb); preillness weight: 59 kg (130 lb).
Clinical Studies: Small intestine roentgenogram: segmental distortion consistent with recurrent inflammation and edema.
Diagnosis: Recurrent regional enteritis, with intes- tinal malabsorption and recurring obstruction after ileal resection.


Impairment Rating: 40% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Only marginal function; impaired nutri- tional state, and weight deficit exceeds 10% of desirable level despite dietary adjustment and medication. Parenteral nutrition therapy (home treatment program), administered characteristi- cally at night while person is asleep, significantly reduces degree of impairment of many individu- als. Length and function of remaining normal bowel is an important consideration when assess- ing severity of impairment.8
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-13
25% to 49% Impairment Due to Pancreatic Disease

Subject: 45-year-old woman.
History: Chronic abdominal pain secondary to chronic pancreatitis. Reported a 10-year excessive alcohol intake and repeated acute pancreatitis.
Opioid drugs required for some relief. Diabetes mellitus; requires small but multiple daily insulin doses. Diarrhea with steatorrhea over last year helped by pancreatic enzymes.
Current Symptoms: Unable to maintain weight; 15% below ideal. Currently abstaining from alcohol.
Physical Exam: Significant weight loss; abdominal burn marks from heating pads.
Clinical Studies: Abdomen CT scan: calcification throughout pancreas. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography: normal biliary ductal system. Main pancreatic duct very distorted with abnormal side branches and small pseudocyst. No evidence of malignancy.
Diagnosis: Chronic pancreatitis with intractable pain; exocrine and endocrine insufficiency.
Impairment Rating: 40% impairment due to chronic pancreatitis. Combine (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604) with appropriate impairment estimate for diabetes to determine whole person impairment. See Chapter 10, The Endocrine
System, for impairment related to diabetes mellitus.
Comment: Impaired exocrine and endocrine pancre- atic functions; continuing treatment necessary.
Despite treatment, individual unable to bring weight to within 10% of desirable level. Total pancreatectomy may be indicated for pain relief attempt. Continuing alcohol use greatly increases mortality.3 Offered surgery for duct and pseudo- cyst drainage and possible pain management. No surgical benefit for diabetes and malabsorption.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-14
50% to 75% Impairment Due to Upper Digestive Tract Disease

Subject: 62-year-old man.
History: Total gastrectomy 3 years ago for stomach cancer. Esophagoenterostomy (Hunt-Lawrence pouch) constructed.
Current Symptoms: Postoperative anorexia and early satiety; unrelenting weight loss and signs of nutritional deficiency. Marked fatigue, weakness, and inability to read or write except for brief periods.
Physical Exam: Height: 1.75 m (5 ft 9 in); weight:
52.7 kg (116 lb). Malnourished; appears older than stated age. Tongue smooth and glistening. No palpated masses in vicinity of healed upper abdominal scar. Slight pedal edema.
Clinical Studies: Laboratory tests: anemia and hypoproteinemia. Roentgenography: intact esophagojejunostomy; no mucosal defect.
Diagnosis: Postoperative absence of the stomach with esophagojejunal anastomosis; secondary nutritional deficiency.
Impairment Rating: 60% impairment due to total gastrectomy; combine with appropriate anemia impairment estimate (see Chapter 9,
The Hematopoietic System) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Weight loss exceeds 20% of desirable level; evidence of marked nutritional deficiency. Individual unable to perform many activities of daily living. If he continues to be free of recurrent cancer, consider supplemental parenteral nutrition therapy (home treatment program).
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-15
50% to 75% Impairment Due to Upper Digestive Tract Disease

Subject: 58-year-old man.


History: Almost complete esophageal obstruction. Extensive lower esophagus and proximal stomach resection due to cancer 5 years ago. No evidence of tumor recurrence. Early satiety severely restricts eating ability.
Current Symptoms: Gastrostomy tube for feeding. Dilation of strictured esophagus required once a month to accommodate saliva secretion.
Physical Exam: Height: 1.78 m (5 ft 10 in); weight: 49.9 kg (110 lb); preillness weight:
68.1 kg (150 lb).
Clinical Studies: Endoscopy: unsuccessful surgical correction.
Diagnosis: Stenosing esophagitis.
Impairment Rating: 65% impairment due to stenosing esophagitis and 15% impairment due to gastrostomy; combined 70% impairment of the whole person (see the Combined Values Chart,
p. 604). Combine impairments due to cancer and other medical conditions with this impairment percentage.
Comment: Disease symptoms and signs progressed despite exhaustive treatment; further therapy only palliative. Weight loss exceeds 20% of desirable level. Poor prognosis. Esophageal stent may pro- vide palliation and avoidance of dilations.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-16
50% to 75% Impairment Due to Pancreatic Disease

Subject: 47-year-old man.
History: Manufacturer’s representative; 13 months prior onset of vague abdominal pain, weight loss, and uncharacteristic depression, followed by grad- ually deepening jaundice. Cystic adenocarcinoma occupying most of the pancreas. Surgical eradica- tion of lesion required total pancreatectomy and duodenectomy (Whipple operation).
Malabsorption syndrome with steatorrhea only partially relieved by pancreatic enzyme supple- ments. Brittle diabetes mellitus after operation despite close monitoring and repeated daily insulin injections.
Current Symptoms: Barely able to perform essen- tial activities of daily living.
Physical Exam: Cachectic. Weight declined since operation to 25% below desirable level.
Clinical Studies: Glucose levels: highly variable.

Diagnosis: Pancreatic insufficiency consequent to total pancreatectomy.
Impairment Rating: 70% impairment due to total pancreatic insufficiency; combine with appropri- ate impairment estimate for diabetes mellitus (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment (refer to Chapter 10, The Endocrine System).
Comment: Capacity to perform normal activities of daily living seriously impaired by total pancreatic loss; intensive treatment only partially alleviated debility.3
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-17
50% to 75% Impairment Due to Small Intestine Disease


Subject: 35-year-old woman.

History: Department store salesperson; life-threaten- ing volvulus 1 year ago. Major small bowel por- tion entrapped in adhesions from previous operation required extensive resection of incarcer- ated and strangulated intestine. Dehydration and electrolyte depletion necessitated repeated hospi- talization.

Current Symptoms: Dependent on continuous dietary control and nutritional supplements. Takes frequent medication to alleviate abdominal pain and diarrhea. Diminished stamina; needs assis- tance with essential activities of daily living.

Physical Exam: Height: 1.65 m (5 ft 5 in); weight:
39.5 kg (87 lb), relatively stable; should be at least 57.6 kg (127 lb) for medium frame. Sharply reduced intestinal absorptive capacity. Otherwise normal.

Clinical Studies: Hematologic studies: consistent with malabsorption.

Diagnosis: Intestinal malabsorption due to extensive small bowel resection.

Impairment Rating: 75% impairment of the whole person.

Comment: Nutritional status severely impaired by irreversible small intestine defect. Weight loss exceeds 20% of desirable level; needs assistance with performance of daily living activities.
---END EXAMPLE---

6.3 Colon, Rectum,
	and Anus
6.3
a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Colonic or Rectal Disease
Criteria for evaluating impairments in function of the colon and rectum are listed in Table 6-4.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-18
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Colonic or Rectal Disease
Subject: 50-year-old woman.
History: Part-time social worker; general good health. Several years’ tendency of mildly erratic bowel action with alternating constipation and diarrhea. Stools of varied consistency never con- tained abnormal materials.

Current Symptoms: Episodes of cramping bowel movements; alternating diarrhea and constipation.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Proctosigmoidoscopy: clear mucosa; barium enema: normal colon with several sigmoid diverticula; no evidence of diverticulitis.
Diagnosis: Irritable bowel syndrome and diverticulo- sis coli.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Symptoms, while occasionally annoying, do not interfere with performance of daily activi- ties. Needs only minor dietary adjustment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-19
10% to 24% Impairment Due to Colonic or Rectal Disease

Subject: 28-year-old woman.
History: Graduate student; part-time teaching assis- tant; 10 years’ recurring ulcerative colitis.
Exacerbations produced moderate abdominal distress, diarrhea, and passage of blood-tinged stools. No fever, anemia, or hospitalization.
Symptoms responded to moderately restricted diet, antidiarrheal medication, and avoidance of unduly strenuous activity.
Current Symptoms: Episodic diarrhea.
Physical Exam: Guaiac-positive stools.
Clinical Studies: Colonoscopy: varying degrees of granularity and punctate friability in rectosigmoid mucosa; endoscopy: colon remainder appeared normal.
Diagnosis: Idiopathic ulcerative colitis; mild; limited to the rectosigmoid segment.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Remittent disease; symptoms only occa- sionally interfere with performance of necessary daily activities. Symptomatic, supportive therapy adequately controls disease.7
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-20
25% to 49% Impairment Due to Colonic or Rectal Disease


Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: Computer programmer; Crohn’s disease since age 19. Several hospitalizations that required intensive therapy and transfusion of packed red blood cells to correct anemia.
Current Symptoms: Recurring diarrhea associated with cramping abdominal pain and occasional perianal suppuration with draining fistulas.
Elective proctocolectomy declined.
Physical Exam: Weight remains 20% or more below desirable level. Guaiac-positive stools.
Clinical Studies: Crohn’s disease lesions affecting the perineum, rectum, several colon segments, and the terminal ileum.
Diagnosis: Chronic, recurrent enterocolitis (Crohn’s disease).
Impairment Rating: 45% impairment due to ente- rocolitis; combine with appropriate anemia impairment estimate to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Chronic inflammatory bowel disease, while remitting occasionally, interferes with per- formance of daily activities. Requires continuing close observation and treatment. Impaired nutri- tional status. Continuing Crohn’s disease activity mostly in colon with only distal ileum involve- ment; proctocolectomy and Brooke ileostomy may significantly improve the general condition, perhaps with less impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-21
50% to 75% Impairment Due to Colonic or Rectal Disease

Subject: 42-year-old woman.
History: 15 years’ chronic ulcerative colitis. Activity limited; required intensive treatment, including occasional blood transfusion. Persistent fever, anemia, and jaundice.
Current Symptoms: Increasing debility; nutritional deficiency. Further complications of inflammatory bowel disease.

Physical Exam: Cachectic; jaundice and hepatomegaly.
Clinical Studies: Barium enema, colonoscopy: extensive and severe colon involvement. Liver function tests: severely abnormal; liver biopsy: nonsuppurative cholangitic cirrhosis.
Diagnosis: Chronic ulcerative colitis, severe; scle- rosing cholangitis with cirrhosis.
Impairment Rating: 60% impairment due to ulcera- tive colitis; combine with appropriate impairment estimates for the liver disorder and anemia (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine the whole person impairment.
Comment: Declined liver transplantation option.
Physician does not consider colectomy as a therapeutic option due to general debility and advanced, complicated disease. Proctocolectomy has no beneficial effect on sclerosing cholangitis.9 Increased acceptability of new anastomosis such as ileal-pouch anal anastomosis provides greater security and privacy and may lead to earlier sur- gery in severe ulcerative colitis.
---END EXAMPLE---

6.3b Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Anal Disease
Criteria for evaluating permanent impairments of the anus are listed in Table 6-5.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-22
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Anal Disease

Subject: 45-year-old man.
History: Acute pararectal abscess surgically drained 5 years ago. Anal fistula; recurrent acute infection and intermittent drainage. Fistulectomy 1 year ago.
Current Symptoms: No further infection or drainage; regular bowel activity.
Physical Exam: Well-healed anal scar with slight anal orifice distortion; no anal sphincter weak- ness.
Clinical Studies: Proctosigmoidoscopy: normal except for anal scarring.
Diagnosis: Healed anal fistula.
Impairment Rating: 0% to 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Documented anal disease appropriately and successfully treated. Performance of daily activities unimpaired.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-23
10% to 19% Impairment Due to Anal Disease


Subject: 32-year-old woman.
History: 14 years’ Crohn’s colitis, usually well con- trolled by medical therapy. During one exacerba- tion, developed pararectal abscess that ruptured spontaneously and led to development of chroni- cally draining anal fistula. Later developed small rectovaginal fistula. Anal dysfunction symptoms occasionally recurred; usually tolerably controlled by treatment. Anal fistula surgery attempt inadvis- able because of disease extent elsewhere in the rectum and colon.
Current Symptoms: Episodic fecal incontinence.
Physical Exam: Inactive perianal disease.
Clinical Studies: Colonoscopy: Crohn’s disease throughout colon and rectum.
Diagnosis: Chronic anal fistula with moderate impairment of anal function, associated with Crohn’s disease of the colon.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment due to anal disorder; combine with colonic disease and gyne- cologic impairment ratings to determine whole person impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Impaired anal function, but symptoms responsive to treatment when required. Slightly impaired ability to perform activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-24
20% to 35% Impairment Due to Anal Disease

Subject: 56-year-old man.
History: Pararectal abscess that drained sponta- neously; 3 years’ recurrent infection; fistulous tracts opened four other areas surrounding anus. Two-stage surgical repair; incision and excision of substantial portions of the anal sphincter muscle. Recovery delayed by wound infections.
Current Symptoms: Perineum eventually healed; no fecal control. Despite daily rectal irrigation, soils himself occasionally.
Physical Exam: Complete functional loss of anal sphincter mechanism.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Anal incontinence due to complete loss of sphincter function.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Uncontrollable fecal incontinence not amenable to further therapy. Sigmoid colostomy might provide greater comfort and security with less impairment (see Table 6-6).
---END EXAMPLE---

6.4 Enterocutaneous
	Fistulas
Evaluate permanent enterocutaneous fistulas of the gastrointestinal tract, biliary tract, or pancreas that are associated with diseases of these structures or their treatment as part of the primarily involved organ system. Permanent, surgically created stomas usually are provided to compensate for anatomic losses and to allow either ingress to or egress from the alimentary tract.

If an individual has a permanent, surgically created stoma, combine a percentage based on Table 6-6 with an estimate based on criteria related to the involved organ (see the Combined Values Chart,
p. 604).

Many people with well-functioning, long-standing stomas such as Brooke ileostomy or descending colostomy lead full and active lives with few limita- tions in overall performance of daily activities.


6.5 Liver and
	Biliary Tract
6.5a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Liver or Biliary Tract Disease
Criteria for evaluating permanent impairment of the liver and biliary tract are listed in Tables 6-7 and 6-8.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-25
0% to 14% Impairment Due to Liver Disease
Subject: 30-year-old man.
History: Excessive alcohol consumption.
Hospitalized 5 years ago for severe delirium tremens, fever, and jaundice. Liver biopsy speci- men: extensive fatty metamorphosis with steatonecrosis, scattered inflammatory cell infil- tration, and minimal periportal fibrosis.
Current Symptoms: Since hospital release, abstains from alcohol, feels well, and exhibits normal vigor and appetite.
Physical Exam: Well-developed, muscular man; no jaundice or ascites. Liver edge was palpated 2 cm below right costal margin.
Clinical Studies: Liver function tests: within normal limits; serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST; formerly serum glutamic oxaloacetic transami- nase) level: 1.5 times normal.
Diagnosis: History of acute alcoholic hepatitis and steatonecrosis, with residual slight hepatomegaly, without changes in ability to perform activities of daily living.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Preexisting disease well documented. Satisfactory recovery; only minimal evidence of residual hepatic impairment. Requires no treat- ment other than continued abstinence from alco- hol; engages fully in normal activities of daily living. Most individuals with alcohol abuse his- tory need considerable help from professionals and family to continue abstinence; failure risks recurrent alcoholic hepatitis episodes that, if severe, may be fatal or lead to cirrhosis and class 4 impairment.10
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-26
15% to 29% Impairment Due to Liver Disease


Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: Plumber; acute viral hepatitis with a pro- tracted convalescence 10 years ago.
Current Symptoms: Disease quiescent; no visible icterus, ascites, or GI tract bleeding. Satisfactory strength and nutritional state; limited stamina.
Physical Exam: Well nourished and well muscled.
Several small telangiectasias on left shoulder. Nontender, firm, rounded liver edge palpated 4 cm below right costal margin; inferior spleen mar- gin palpated 1 cm below left costal margin.
Clinical Studies: Liver function tests: serum biliru- bin, 36 mmol/L (2.1 mg/dL); serum albumin,
40 g/L; serum globulin, 40 g/L; and serum AST, 70 U/L. Positive serum hepatitis B surface antigen and core antibodies. Liver biopsy specimen: peri- portal hepatitis and piecemeal necrosis (now called “interface hepatitis”); early indications of extension between portal tracts and central veins.
Diagnosis: Chronic hepatitis B.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Documented evidence of chronic active hepatitis; can perform normal activities of daily living, although has reduced stamina. Slight to moderate impaired liver function. Chronic hepati- tis implies 6 months or more of inflammation; nomenclature for specific forms reflects etiologic or pathologic mechanisms. Cirrhosis likely; pro- gression to class 3 or 4 impairment. Timing this evolution less predictable; may be influenced by treatment programs. Increased impairment if hepatitis C is present with elevated risk of hepa- tocellular carcinoma.11
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-27
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Biliary Tract Disese

Subject: 46-year-old woman.
History: Teacher; concerned about increasing pruri- tus, loss of strength, and decreased stamina. Itch onset 2 years ago; routine blood chemistry: ele- vated serum alkaline phosphatase. Ingested no drugs known to cause cholestasis; antimitochon- drial antibody test positive.
Current Symptoms: Recent significantly increased impairment: unable to complete all daily activities due to increasing debility.
Physical Exam: Generalized hyperpigmentation, scratch marks, mild jaundice, a few xanthomata, and probable splenomegaly.
Clinical Studies: Laboratory studies: alkaline phos- phatase 4 times normal levels; serum bilirubin:
5 mg/dL, positive antimitochondrial antibody. Retrograde cholangiogram: normal extrahepatic ducts. Liver biopsy: small bile ducts damaged, interlobular bile ducts damaged; scarring consis- tent with primary biliary cirrhosis. Discussed liver transplantation as future consideration.
Responded only minimally to various treatment protocols. Cholestasis increased to 12 mg serum bilirubin. Individual awaited liver transplant donor availability.
Diagnosis: Primary biliary cirrhosis.
Impairment Rating: 40% at time of confirmed diagnosis; progression to class 4 impairment when put on liver transplant waiting list.
Comment: Primary biliary cirrhosis is a relentlessly progressive liver disease that leads to class 4 impairment. Orthotopic liver transplantation offers significant benefit and should be considered early. Currently, the majority of recipients report a remarkable improvement in quality of life and many enjoy normal lifestyles, although compli- ance with drug therapies and follow-up visits are required. A successful transplant may ultimately reduce the impairment of the whole person.12,13
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-28
50% to 95% Impairment Due to Biliary Tract Disease


Subject: 55-year-old woman.
History: Repeated acute cholecystitis attacks for 5 years. Refused to seek medical care because of religious beliefs.
Current Symptoms: Increasingly frequent and severe bouts of right upper quadrant pain, nausea, vomiting, fever, jaundice, dark urine, and pruritus. Unable to perform many basic activities of daily living for over a year.
Physical Exam: Jaundiced; right upper quadrant pain to palpitation.
Clinical Studies: Laboratory tests: biliary obstruc- tion and advanced liver damage. Liver biopsy specimen: advanced biliary cirrhosis. Declined any consideration of an invasive procedure that might alleviate disease.
Diagnosis: Biliary cirrhosis, secondary to recurrent and progressive obstruction of bile ducts.
Impairment Rating: 85% impairment of the whole person.

Comment: Severe and irreparable impairment of liver and biliary tract function. Needs live-in assistance to perform normal activities of daily living. Laparoscopic removal of calculus contain- ing gallbladder, endoscopic extraction of common bile duct stones, and great variety of billiary drainage procedures may greatly reduce the total impairment rating.13
---END EXAMPLE---

6.6  Hernias
6.6a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Herniation
Criteria for evaluating impairment due to herniation are listed in Table 6-9.


Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Uncomplicated incisional hernia.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Asymptomatic incisional hernia only mildly annoying. No significant risk of complica- tion. No limit in ability to perform activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-29
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Hernia
Subject: 60-year-old woman.
History: Cholecystectomy for calculous biliary tract disease relief 3 years ago. Uneventful postopera- tive course.
Current Symptoms: No complaints; eating well; no abdominal discomfort.
Physical Exam: Healed oblique, right upper quad- rant incision; palpable defect in middle part.
Slight, visible protrusion at this site when individ- ual rose from supine position. No pain or discom- fort in scar region, which she perceived as unsightly.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-30
10% to 19% Impairment Due to Hernia
Subject: 50-year-old man.
History: Several years’ recurring protrusion in right inguinal area upon straining or exerting increased intra-abdominal pressure.
Current Symptoms: Protrusion visible with bowel movements; reduces hernia himself; no discomfort.
Physical Exam: Enlarged protrusion entered scro- tum base; easily and painlessly reduced. Declined recommended surgical repair; willing to accept heavy lifting preclusion and risk possible compli- cations.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Reducible right indirect inguinal hernia.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Restricted exertion; chose to live with limitation. Aware of possible consequences of unrepaired inguinal hernia; declined operation. No impairment of normally sedentary activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 6-31
20% to 30% Impairment Due to Hernia


Subject: 64-year-old man.
History: Nearing retirement; recurrent, bilateral, inguinal hernias despite three previous attempts at repair: two on the right side and one on the left.
Reluctant to submit to further repair attempts.
Current Symptoms: Frequent discomfort. No supervening complications.
Physical Exam: Protrusions only partially reducible.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Recurrent bilateral inguinal hernias after unsuccessful herniorrhaphy.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Recurrent inguinal hernias only partially reducible despite repeated surgical repair.
Individual obliged to wear supporting device. Frequent inguinal discomfort. Restricted in per- formance of normal activities of daily living, including sports. Possible hazard if supporting device exerts local pressure on partially reduced hernia. Encourage further repair attempts with possible reinforcing mesh use.
---END EXAMPLE---

6.7 Digestive System Impairment
	Evaluation Summary
See Table 6-10 for an evaluation summary for the assessment of permanent impairment due to diges- tive system disorders.


Assessment of






================================================================================
Chapter 7: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Urinary and Reproductive Systems
7.1 Principles of Assessment
7.2 The Urinary System
7.3 Upper Urinary Tract
7.4 Urinary Diversion
7.5 Bladder
7.6 Urethra
7.7 Male Reproductive Organs
7.8 Female Reproductive Organs
7.9 Urinary and Reproductive Systems Impairment Evaluation Summary
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating perma- nent impairments of the urinary and male and female reproductive systems as they affect the body’s overall function and an individual’s ability to perform activi- ties of daily living.

The following sections have been revised for the fifth edition: (1) the criteria for upper and lower urinary tract impairment have been revised; (2) impairment classes for bladder and urethral dysfunction have been revised to reflect an increased understanding of bladder impairment and to incorporate results from urodynamic studies; (3) the reproductive system sections have been updated to reflect more common cases and approaches; and (4) updated and detailed references are listed for the disorders discussed.


143


7.1 Principles of
	Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for per- forming and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

The purpose of urinary and reproductive system impairment assessment is to determine whether a permanent impairment in these systems exists, to assess the severity and document the impact of the impairment on the ability to perform activities of daily living, and to prevent further impairment.

Pathologic abnormalities in other systems (eg, the hematologic, endocrine, or neurologic systems) may produce urinary or reproductive system impairment. These abnormalities are combined with urinary or reproductive system impairments to produce a whole person impairment rating. For example, an intracra- nial brain lesion above the pons will produce some degree of bladder hyperreflexia and an urgent need to urinate. However, an intracranial brain lesion below the pons in the spinal cord will result not only in a hyperreflexic bladder but also in detrusor- sphincter dyssynergia that may result in difficulty urinating, and high intravesical pressures that could lead to vesicoureteral reflux and hydronephrosis.
Urinary tract dysfunction is also seen with lum- bosacral injury below the T10 vertebra level and would be combined with musculoskeletal dysfunc- tion to determine whole person impairment.

To determine the individual’s placement within a particular class range, assess the disease’s severity and impact on the ability to perform the activities of daily living as listed in Table 1-2. Impairment ratings are greater for urinary tract or reproductive impair- ments, which have more of an effect on the ability to perform activities of daily living.


7.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Some impairment classes refer to limitations in the ability to perform daily activities because of symp- toms. When this information is subjective and possibly misinterpreted, it should not serve as the sole criterion upon which decisions about impairment are made.
Rather, obtain objective data about the limitation’s


extent and integrate the findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent impairment.


7.2  The Urinary System
The urinary system consists of the upper urinary tract (the kidneys and ureters), the bladder, and the ure- thra. The parenchyma of the kidneys produces urine, which is conducted by the renal calices, pelves,
and ureters to the bladder and then the urethra.

The kidneys are an important homeostatic regulatory organ. The degree to which kidney and conduit abnormalities may affect the whole person ranges from a clinically undetectable change to marked spe- cific and generalized manifestations of deterioration of the nephron reserves, loss of kidney function, and urine transport abnormalities.

The bladder is a voluntarily controllable urine reser- voir that normally permits several hours of urine retention. Bladder dysfunction may be due to patho- logic conditions within or outside the urinary system. Within the urinary system, bladder tumors, stones, and inflammatory lesions may produce urinary sys- tem impairment.

In women, the urethra is a urinary conduit containing a voluntary sphincter. In men, the urethra possesses a voluntary sphincter and propulsive muscles and is a conduit for urine and seminal ejaculations.

Permanent, surgically created urinary diversions are usually performed to compensate for anatomic losses and to allow for urine outflow. Diversions are evalu- ated as a part of, and in conjunction with, the assess- ment of the involved portion of the urinary tract.
When evaluating permanent impairment of any segment of the urinary system, impairments of all components of the upper and lower tract must be evaluated and combined to determine renal system impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).


7.2 a Interpretation of Urinary Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of upper urinary tract function impairment may include changes in urination; edema; decreased physical stamina; appetite and weight loss; anemia; uremia; loin, abdominal, or costovertebral angle pain; hematuria; chills and fever; hypertension and its complications; abnormalities in the appearance of the urine or its


sediment; and biochemical blood changes. Renal disease, especially in early stages, may be made evident only by laboratory findings.

Signs and symptoms of bladder function impairment may include urinary frequency, dysuria, urinary incontinence, urine retention, hematuria, pyuria, passage of urinary calculi, and a suprapubic mass.

Signs and symptoms of urethra function impairment include dysuria, diminished urinary stream, urinary retention, incontinence, extraneous or ectopic urinary openings, periurethral masses, and diminished ure- thral caliber.


7.2 b Description of Clinical Studies
Two clinically useful renal function determinations, serum creatinine and the renal clearance of endoge- nous creatinine, may serve as criteria for evaluating upper urinary tract function. The serum creatinine level reflects overall renal function. Under normal hydration conditions, the serum creatinine level should be less than 133 µmol/L (1.5 mg/dL).

The glomerular filtration rate, which measures renal clearance of endogenous creatinine, gives a quantita- tive estimate of the total functioning nephron popula- tion. Because longer periods of urine collection improve the reliability of renal function clearance tests, use 24-hour endogenous creatinine clearance measure- ments. The normal creatinine clearance ranges are 130 to 200 L/24 h (90 to 139 mL/min) for men and 115 to
180 L/24 h (80 to 125 mL/min) for women.

If there are discrepancies in these two test results or additional information is needed, tests—such as metabolic studies, tests of the concentration levels of electrolytes and other chemicals in serum and urine, urine osmolalities, urinalyses, urine cultures, radio- logic investigations, isotope renograms, and renal computed tomographic (CT) scans—may be neces- sary to determine impairment.

Parenchymal disfiguration and conduit abnormality assessment may require diagnostic procedures such as endoscopy, study of one or both kidneys, biopsy, arteriography, radiography of the urinary tract, CAT scan, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

Objective techniques useful in evaluating bladder function include (but are not limited to) cystoscopy, cystography, voiding cystourethrography, cystome- try, uroflometry, urinalysis, and urine cultures.

Objective techniques useful in evaluating urethral function include (but are not limited to) ure- throscopy, urethrography, cystourethrography, endoscopy, and cystometrography.


7.3  Upper Urinary Tract

7.3 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Upper Urinary Tract Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating upper urinary tract disease are given in Table 7-1. The creatinine clearance, the most accurate reflection of renal func- tion, is an important criterion in each class because it quantifies the degree of upper urinary tract func- tional impairment.

From a physiologic point of view, the individual with only one functioning kidney may have normal over- all renal function because of the efficiency of the remaining kidney. However, with only one kidney, a normal safety factor is lost. Consider the individual with only one functioning kidney as having a 10% whole person impairment because of such an essen- tial organ loss. Combine this percentage with the estimate for any other permanent impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

Renal function deterioration that requires either peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis indicates severe impairment in the 60% to 95% range, or a class 4 impairment (Table 7-1). Successful renal transplantation may result in marked renal function improvement; the impairment is now in the 15% to 34% range, or a class 2 impairment. However,
transplant recipients require continuous observation and medication, which may add to their impair- ment. For this reason, depending upon the impairment’s effect on the activities of daily living (see Table 1-2), one may add 0% to 5% to the final renal function impairment estimate, as discussed in Chapter 1.1

Also, evaluate impairment that is related to compli- cations of the disease or therapy, such as cushingoid changes and osteoporosis, as they arise, and combine the appropriate percentages with the final renal impairment estimate (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).


Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Full recovery with no permanent impair- ment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-1
0% to 14% Impairment Due to Upper Urinary Tract Disease

Subject: 22-year-old man.
History: Backache, fever, hematuria, headache, and hypertension during attack of hemolytic streptococ- cal tonsillitis at age 12. Urine: red blood cell, red blood cell casts; 2.4 g protein/24 h. Creatinine clear- ance: 72 L/24 h (50 mL/min). Creatinine clearance 6 months later: 130 L/24 h (90 mL/min).
Current Symptoms: None.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Urinalysis: normal. Creatinine clearance: 158 L/24 h (110 mL/min). Biopsy showed no renal disease.
Diagnosis: Complete recovery from poststreptococ- cal acute glomerulonephritis.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-2
0% to 14% Impairment Due to Upper Urinary Tract Disease

Subject: 40-year-old man.
History: Acute renal colic. Passage of small urinary calculus. Two previous episodes of renal colic.
Spontaneous passage of urinary calculi.
Current Symptoms: Occasional flank pain; limited physical activity.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Normal excretory urograms with no evidence of metabolic disease. Urine, creati- nine clearance, and phenolsulfonphthalein study results: within normal limits.
Diagnosis: Recurrent renal calculi.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Occasional renal colic, affecting sexual function and activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-3
15% to 34% Impairment Due to Upper Urinary Tract Disease

Subject: 45-year-old man.
History: Childhood nephritis; emergency appendec- tomy; appendiceal abscess drainage. Adequate postoperative urine output. Serum creatinine:
248 µmol/L (2.8 mg/dL). Prolonged convales- cence. Anemia subsided and stamina returned to normal.
Current Symptoms: Feels well 12 months after appendectomy and engages in most usual daily activities. Decreased exercise tolerance for com- petitive social activities (eg, basketball).
Physical Exam: Unremarkable.
Clinical Studies: Urine: trace protein (0.75 g/24 h). Excretory urograms show no architectural abnor- mality. Creatinine clearance: 60 to 70 L/24 h (42
to 49 mL/min).
Diagnosis: Persistent proteinuria after childhood nephritis, aggravated by surgery years later.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Protein restriction.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-4
15% to 34% Impairment Due to Upper Urinary Tract Disease

Subject: 52-year-old man.
History: Retroperitoneal fibrosis; left lower ureter function severely damaged; ureter surgically reconstructed.
Current Symptoms: Upon discontinuing antibacter- ial medication, repeated pyelonephritis attacks that disrupt activity.
Physical Exam: Flank tenderness.

Clinical Studies: Excretory urography: vesico- ureteral reflux despite apparently normal left kid- ney architecture and function. Creatinine clearance: 100 L/24 h (69 mL/min).
Diagnosis: Active unilateral chronic pyelonephritis secondary to vesicoureteral reflux.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Pyelonephritis recurrence. No surgical intervention; left kidney appears normal, with no functional deterioration.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-5
15% to 34% Impairment Due to Upper Urinary Tract Disease

Subject: 50-year-old woman.
History: Successful operation for parathyroid ade- noma. Periodic pyelonephritis attacks from resid- ual calculi in both kidneys with sporadic passage of stones. Continuous medication controls urinary tract infection; antibiotics correct pyelonephritis attacks.
Current Symptoms: Infrequent high fever, chills, and back pain.
Physical Exam: Bilateral flank tenderness.
Clinical Studies: Creatinine clearance: stable 65 L/24 h (45 mL/min). Excretory urography: bilat- eral pyelocaliceal deformities; kidney size unchanged in 3 years.
Diagnosis: Renal calculi and bilateral chronic pyelonephritis.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment due to upper urinary tract impairment. Combine urinary tract impairment with parathyroid impairment for impairment of the whole person (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Prevent complications with increased water and fluid intake and compliancy with daily medications.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-6
15% to 34% Impairment Due to Upper Urinary Tract Disease

Subject: 28-year-old man.


History: Hemodialysis for marked azotemia and oliguria from progressive chronic glomerulonephri- tis. Successful renal transplantation of mother’s kidney; good renal function. Azathioprine and prednisone maintenance treatment; close observa- tion for osteoporosis development.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic.
Physical Exam: Cushingoid features.
Clinical Studies: Creatinine clearance: 108 L/24 h (75 ml/min).
Diagnosis: Functioning renal transplant.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person due to renal disease and the need for contin- uous medication. Combine any permanent impair- ment percent related to a complication with the renal impairment estimate (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Reevaluate if secondary infection or other complication develops due to immunosup- pressive therapy.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-7
35% to 59% Impairment Due to Upper Urinary Tract Disease

Subject: 48-year-old man.
History: Calculi in minor calices of both kidneys.
Multiple endoscopic and open surgical stone removals. Continuous antibacterial medication.
Current Symptoms: Periodic chills, fever, and back pain. Spends several days per month ill at home.
Physical Exam: Bilateral flank tenderness.
Clinical Studies: Notable diminution of a kidney; bilateral pyelographic architectural changes from previous surgeries and recurrent pyelonephritis. Creatinine clearance: 65 L/24 h (45 mL/min).
Infected urine.
Diagnosis: Renal calculi with bilateral recurrent pyelonephritis.

Impairment Rating: 50% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Monitor and treat recurrent infections.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-8
35% to 59% Impairment Due to Upper Urinary Tract Disease

Subject: 48-year-old man.
History: Hematuria from automobile crash injury. Blood pressure: 150/90 mm Hg. Hospital bed rest for 1 week, then discharged. All other findings within normal limits. Blood pressure later: 240/160 mm Hg. Malignant hypertensive retinopathy. Creatinine clearance: 58 L/24 h
(40 mL/min).
Current Symptoms: Severe headaches 16 months later.
Physical Exam: Blood pressure: 170/110 mm Hg (after surgery); 155/95 mm Hg in 6 months.
Eyegrounds: group 2 changes (Keith-Wagener- Barker classification). Left kidney removed.
Clinical Studies: Damaged left kidney on radiologic studies. Creatinine clearance: 40 L/24 h
(28 mL/min). Definite left renovascular hyperten- sion. Malignant hypertensive changes on right kidney biopsy. Ischemia and juxtaglomerular hypertrophy on left kidney histologic examination.
Diagnosis: Left nephrectomy for malignant hyper- tensive vascular disease.
Impairment Rating: 55% arteriolar nephrosclerosis impairment and 10% nephrectomy impairment. Combine for 60% urinary system impairment.
Combine 60% impairment with appropriate cardiovascular impairment value to determine impairment of the whole person (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Monitor renal function; protein restric- tion check.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-9
35% to 59% Impairment Due to Upper Urinary Tract Disease

Subject: 52-year-old woman.
History: Needs help with some everyday activities.
No clear-cut nephritis history.
Current Symptoms: Chronic fatigue.
Physical Exam: Pale; appears weak.


Clinical Studies: Moderate anemia. Elevated serum creatinine level. Diffuse bilateral glomerulonephri- tis on renal biopsy. Contracted kidneys and normal pyelocaliceal architecture evident on high-dose excretory urography. Urine culture: negative.
Creatinine clearance: 50 L/24 h (35 mL/min).
Diagnosis: Chronic glomerulonephritis with renal atrophy.2
Impairment Rating: 59% impairment due to upper urinary tract impairment. Combine with appropri- ate rating for anemia to determine impairment of the whole person (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Monitor renal function.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-10
60% to 95% Impairment Due to Upper Urinary Tract Disease

Subject: 44-year-old man.
History: Family history of polycystic renal disease. Gross hematuria; protein-restricted diet. Until cur- rent episode, worked regularly and felt well.
Current Symptoms: Relatively asymptomatic.
Sudden flank pain.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Serum creatinine: 707 to 884 µmol/L (8 to 10 mg/dL) (increased in 2 years preceding acute episode). Creatinine clearance: 35 L/24 h (24 mL/min). Bilateral deformities characteristic of polycystic renal disease on endoscopy and retrograde urograms.
Diagnosis: Bilateral polycystic renal disease; advanced renal insufficiency.
Impairment Rating: 70% impairment of the whole person.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-11
60% to 95% Impairment Due to Upper Urinary Tract Disease

Subject: 25-year-old woman.
History: Severe abruptio placentae. Creatinine clear- ance: 35 L/24 h (24 mL/min). Bilateral deformi- ties characteristic of polycystic renal disease on endoscopy and retrograde urograms. Periodic peritoneal dialysis. Anuria for 49 days, then olig- uria, then increased urine output. Serum creati- nine level fell without peritoneal dialysis after
60 days. Performed some activities of daily living despite severely compromised renal function
12 months after anuria.
Current Symptoms: Fatigued; requires daily nap.
Physical Exam: Unremarkable.
Clinical Studies: Percutaneous renal biopsy. Renal cortical necrosis. Creatinine clearance: 11.5 L/24 h (8 mL/min).
Diagnosis: Renal cortical necrosis and severe chronic renal failure.
Impairment Rating: 75% impairment of the whole person.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-12
60% to 95% Impairment Due to Upper Urinary Tract Disease

Subject: 56-year-old woman.
History: Chronic progressive glomerulonephritis. Severe anemia, azotemia, and oliguria. Twice- weekly hemodialysis. Felt well 1 or 2 days after treatment.
Current Symptoms: Nausea, lethargy, and edema before hemodialysis.
Physical Exam: Cachetic; bilateral peripheral edema.
Clinical Studies: Moderate anemia.
Diagnosis: Severe chronic renal failure and refrac- tory anemia.
Impairment Rating: 80% to 90% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Renal failure and chronic refractory anemia justify high impairment rating.
---END EXAMPLE---

7.4  Urinary Diversion

7.4 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Urinary Diversion Disorders
The impairment criteria for evaluating urinary diversion disorders are given in Table 7-2.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-13
10% Impairment Due to Ureteroileostomy
Subject: 52-year-old woman.
History: Anterior pelvic exenteration and ureteroileostomy for cervical carcinoma. No recurrent cancer for 7 years. Calculi removed from both kidneys.
Current Symptoms: Periodic pyelonephritis, even with continual medication.
Physical Exam: Flank tenderness.
Clinical Studies: Pyelonephritis on radiologic stud- ies. Creatinine clearance: 60 L/24 h (24 mL/min).
Diagnosis: Ureteroileostomy, urinary diversion, and chronic bilateral pyelonephritis.
Impairment Rating: 65% impairment due to bilat- eral pyelonephritis and 10% impairment due to ureteroileostomy; combine these with appropriate rating due to pelvic exenteration (ie, bladder, lower ureters, uterus, cervix, vagina, fallopian tubes, and ovaries excision) to determine impair- ment of the whole person (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-14
15% Impairment Due to Nephrostomy


Subject: 56-year-old man.
History: Bilateral nephrostomies. Obliterative, fibrotic, ureteral disease for 5 years. Renal calculi removed. Unsuccessful surgical attempt to recon- stitute normal conduit function. Urinary infection unresponsive to treatment. Performed some activities of daily living without assistance.
Current Symptoms: Hematuria with change of nephrostomy tubes. Occasional fever and flank pain.
Physical Exam: Nephrostomy tubes in both flanks.
Clinical Studies: Creatinine clearance: 50 L/24 h (35 mL/min).
Diagnosis: Pyeloureteral disease requiring bilateral nephrostomy diversion.
Impairment Rating: 65% impairment due to pyeloureteral disease and 15% impairment due to bilateral nephrostomies; combine for 70% impair- ment of the whole person (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).


7.5  Bladder

7.5 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Bladder Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating bladder dis- ease are given in Table 7.3.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-15
0% to 15% Impairment Due to Bladder Disease

Subject: 41-year-old woman.
History: Radium treatment for uterine fibroids 20 years previously. Emergency hospitalization and blood vessel fulguration for recent urinary tract bleeding (1 to 2 weeks to 6 months) from postirra- diation bladder telangiectasia.
Current Symptoms: Marked frequency of urination.
Physical Exam: Unremarkable.
Clinical Studies: Blood and urine studies between attacks: normal.
Diagnosis: Postirradiation telangiectasia of the bladder.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Regular cystoscopic monitoring may be required.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-16
0% to 15% Impairment Due to Bladder Disease


Subject: 42-year-old man.
History: Chronic renal infection resistant to antibi- otic therapy. Insignificant relief with anticholiner- gic medications. Good general physical condition. Refused surgical urinary diversion.
Current Symptoms: Severe cystitis. Emptied blad- der less than every 30 minutes. Used urine- collecting device. Could not retain urine long enough to perform usual activities of daily living.
Physical Exam: Bladder tenderness to percussion.
Clinical Studies: Urine: numerous white blood cells; few red blood cells. Small bladder capacity on urodynamics.
Diagnosis: Chronic cystitis.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment due to cysti- tis; combine with appropriate rating for upper uri- nary tract disorder to determine impairment of the whole person (see the Combined Values Chart,
p. 604).
Comment: Frequent urine cultures.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-17
16% to 40% Impairment Due to Bladder Disease
Subject: 35-year-old woman.
History: Progressive and painful urinary frequency, urinating every 10 to 15 minutes day and night. Interstitial cystitis; ineffective treatment with bladder dilation with various agents. Cystectomy and ureteroileostomy. Resumed most normal activities.
Current Symptoms: Adjusting to changes in bowel movements.
Physical Exam: Ureteroileostomy functioning well.
Clinical Studies: Normal, uninfected upper urinary tract.
Diagnosis: Contracted, fixed bladder requiring uri- nary diversion.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person due to urinary diversion procedure after bladder removal.
Comment: Monitor.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-18
41% to 70% Impairment Due to Bladder Disease
Subject: 60-year-old man.
History: Cerebrovascular accident. Regained motor function but had residual bladder dysfunction.
Urinated every 45 minutes. Urinary incontinence requires protective padding.

Current Symptoms: Urinates six times a night.
Anticholinergic medications improve daytime uri- nation frequency to every 1 to 11/2 hours, nocturia to four times nightly. Improved urge incontinence.
Physical Exam: Bladder tenderness.
Clinical Studies: Hyperreflexic, hypercontractile bladder on urodynamics. 3-6
Diagnosis: Urge incontinence, frequency, and noc- turia due to neurologic bladder dysfunction.
Impairment Rating: 45% impairment due to uri- nary incontinence and poor reflex activity.
Comment: Monitor for urinary infections.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-19
41% to 70% Impairment Due to Bladder Disease


Subject: 25-year-old man.
History: Tetraplegia following auto accident.
Current Symptoms: Lost full bowel and bladder control; paralysis of upper and lower extremities.
Physical Exam: Sphincterotomy. External condom and intermittent catheterization.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Tetraplegia, with bowel and bladder dysfunction.
Impairment Rating: 50% impairment due to total loss of urinary control; combine with appropriate ratings due to bowel and musculoskeletal impair- ments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Monitor renal function and for urinary tract infection.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-20
41% to 70% Impairment Due to Bladder Disease

Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: Fell from building roof; lumbar spine com- pression fracture and lumbar spinal cord contu- sion. Initially paraplegic. Recovered use of lower extremities with surgical debridement and rehabil- itation.
Current Symptoms: Perineum and perirectal numb- ness. Total urinary and bowel incontinence.
Physical Exam: Cauda equina neurologic deficit.
External condom catheter.
Clinical Studies: MRI: vertebral compression frac- ture. Urodynamics: areflexic bladder.
Diagnosis: Neurogenic bladder impairment.7,8
Impairment Rating: 60% impairment due to total loss of urinary control; combine with muscu- loskeletal impairment rating to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
7.6
 Urethra

7.6 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Urethral Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating urethral dis- ease are given in Table 7-4.


Impairment Rating: 15% impairment due to ure- thral fistula; combine with impairment for sexual dysfunction (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Monitor kidney function.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-21
0% to 10% Impairment Due to Urethral Disease
Subject: 27-year-old man.
History: Urethral stricture; dilation every few weeks. No urinary tract infection.
Current Symptoms: Symptom-free between dila- tions; symptomatic only as urethra gradually con- stricted.
Physical Exam: Urethral narrowing.
Clinical Studies: Unremarkable.
Diagnosis: Traumatic urethral stricture.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Monitor renal function. If urethra closes completely, may need surgical intervention.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-22
11% to 20% Impairment Due to Urethral Disease
Subject: 23-year-old man.
History: Considerable ventral surface penis lacera- tion, which caused a surgically uncorrectable fis- tula. Performed most activities of daily living and could ejaculate during intercourse but was infer- tile.
Current Symptoms: Could not urinate normally.
Physical Exam: Fistulous opening on the ventral surface of the penis.
Clinical Studies: Urine cultures: positive for bacte- ria. Renal function: normal.
Diagnosis: Urethral fistula.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-23
11% to 20% Impairment Due to Urethral Disease


Subject: 31-year-old man.
History: Struck by vehicle. Pelvic fracture, sym- physis fracture dislocation, prostatomembranous and bulbomembranous urethral lacerations.
Stabilized and healed pelvic fracture. Repaired urethral lacerations. Uncorrectable extensive ure- thral strictures from postoperative fibrosis.
Frequent urethral dilations to urinate 2 years later.
Current Symptoms: Chronic urinary tract infec- tions with ascending pyelonephritis secondary to urethral obstruction and frequent urethral instru- mentation.
Physical Exam: Scarred undersurface of urethra with fistulous tracts.
Clinical Studies: Creatinine clearance: 65 L/24 h (45 mL/min).
Diagnosis: Traumatic urethral stricture with chronic pyelonephritis.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment due to urethral stricture and 25% impairment due to upper urinary tract damage combine for 40% impairment of the whole person (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Monitor kidney function. If hydronephrosis, may need urinary diversion.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-24
21% to 40% Impairment Due to Urethral Disease


Subject: 35-year-old woman.
History: After delivery of third child, urinary incon- tinence with coughing, sneezing, lifting, brisk walking, or running. No urinary tract infections.


Current Symptoms: Urinary incontinence.
Physical Exam: Urethra and bladder neck hypermo- bility; moderate uterine prolapse.
Clinical Studies: No neurologic abnormalities on urodynamics.
Diagnosis: Female stress urinary incontinence due to pelvic relaxation.9
Impairment Rating: 25% due to stress urinary incontinence; combine with 10% impairment for uterine prolapse (see Section 7.8c) for 33% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Urinary incontinence requires protective padding. Stress urinary incontinence due to pelvic relaxation is partly treatable by surgery and may then change the impairment rating.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-25
21% to 40% Impairment Due to Urethral Disease

Subject: 56-year-old man.
History: Radical prostatectomy; localized prostate carcinoma. Discharged postoperative day 4.
Urethral catheter removed 2 weeks postopera- tively. Excellent Kegel exercise compliance. Urinary incontinence requires protective padding. Normal sexual function before procedure.
Current Symptoms: Intermittent urine loss with coughing, sneezing, or heavy lifting 6 months postoperatively. No erections 6 months after sur- gery.
Physical Exam: No anastomotic stricture or obstruc- tion on cystoscopic examination.
Clinical Studies: No neurologic bladder abnormality and poor urinary sphincter tone on urodynamics.
Diagnosis: Stress urinary incontinence after radical prostatectomy.10
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment due to stress urinary incontinence; combine with 20% impair- ment for sexual dysfunction.
Comment:Urinary incontinence requires protective padding. Incontinence may be treatable with the placement of an artificial sphincter around the bulbous urethra, which may change the impair- ment rating.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-26
21% to 40% Impairment Due to Urethral Disease


Subject: 21-year-old man.
History: Factory worker crushed between forklift and wall. Fractured bony pelvis; totally severed urethra at prostate apex; severely lacerated per- ineum. Unsuccessful immediate reconstructive urethral surgery; ureterosigmoidostomy 1 year later. Right kidney hydronephrosis. Diversion converted to ileal conduit.
Current Symptoms: Sporadic renal infections. Impotent. Periodically unable to perform usual daily activities due to occasional urinary tract infections.
Physical Exam: Healed pelvic fracture. No muscu- loskeletal impairment.
Clinical Studies: Creatinine clearance: 70 L/24 h (49 mL/min).
Diagnosis: Severed urethra; hydronephrosis with recurrent urinary tract infection; impotence.
Impairment Rating: 21% impairment due to sev- ered urethra; combine with 30% impairment due to upper urinary tract impairment, 10% impair- ment due to ureteroileostomy, and impairment due to sexual dysfunction (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Monitor serum electrolytes and for renal function deterioration.
---END EXAMPLE---

7.7 Male Reproductive
	Organs
The male reproductive organs include the penis, scrotum, testicles, epididymides, spermatic cords, prostate, and seminal vesicles. See the following sec- tions for impairment percentages for male reproduc- tive organs for 40- to 65-year-old men. Increase the percentages by 50% for men younger than 40, and decrease the percentages by 50% for men older than
65. For instance, class 3 impairment in a 35-year-old man would be rated at 30% (20% + 0.5[20%]). New treatments, when successful, may decrease the degree of impairment.


7.7 a Penis
The penis has the sexual functions of erection and ejaculation. The penis’s urinary function is discussed in the first part of this chapter on the urethra (Section 7.6). Penile functional impairment symptoms and signs include erection and sensation abnormalities and partial or complete loss of the penis.


When evaluating penis impairment, consider both sexual and urinary function impairment. Determine sexual function impairment according to the follow- ing classifications. To determine impairment of the whole person, combine this estimate with the appro- priate percentage for estimated urinary function impairment. This classification also may be used to estimate penile implant use impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

Objective techniques useful in evaluating penis func- tion include (but are not limited to) penile tumes- cence studies, Doppler ultrasound penile blood flow evaluations, dynamic cavernosometry and caver- nosography, and angiography.10-14


7.7b Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Penile Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating penile disease are given in Table 7-5.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-27
0% to 10% Impairment Due to Penile Disease

Subject: 32-year-old man.
History: Compressive penile shaft injury.
Current Symptoms: Normal sensation and ejacula- tion; pain when positions varied.
Physical Exam: Healing with partial cicatrization of left mid-corpus cavernosum. Bowstring left curva- ture occurred during erections.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Posttraumatic fibrosis of left mid-corpus cavernosum.
Impairment Rating: 5% + 0.5(5%) = 8% impairment of the whole person (age of subject considered).
Comment: May need surgical correction.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-28
11% to 19% Impairment Due to Penile Disease

Subject: 28-year-old man.
History: Fractured pelvis; wide symphysis pubis separation; perivesical and periprostatic hematomas; prostatomembranous urethral tear. Injuries corrected with reconstructive surgery; no subsequent urinary difficulty.
Current Symptoms: Erection and intercourse possi- ble; no penile sensation and ejaculation.
Physical Exam: Scarred undersurface of the urethra.
Clinical Studies: Urinary flow: normal.

Diagnosis: Posttraumatic ejaculatory dysfunction and penile anesthesia.13
Impairment Rating: 10% + 0.5(10%) = 15% impairment of the whole person (age of subject is considered).
Comment: Periodically check urine flow rate and monitor kidney function. Possibility of a urethra stricture. Recurrence likely.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-29
20% Impairment Due to Penile Disease


Subject: 18-year-old man.
History: Traumatic penile dislocation.
Current Symptoms: Erection not possible.
Physical Exam: Preserved genital appearance; ure- thral function with corporeal repair and urethro- plasty.
Clinical Studies: Doppler flow studies: showed markedly diminished penile arterial blood flow.
Diagnosis: Posttraumatic vascular and neurologic penile insufficiency.
Impairment Rating: 20% + 0.5(20%) = 30% of the whole person (age of subject is considered).
Comment: Monitor urinary flow rates to forestall urethral stricture.
---END EXAMPLE---

7.7c Scrotum
The scrotum covers, protects, and provides a suitable environment for the testicles. Scrotum function impairment symptoms and signs include pain, enlargement, testicular immobility, inappropriate tes- ticle location, and masses. Objective techniques use- ful in evaluating scrotum function include, but are not limited to, observation, palpation, testicular examination, and scrotal ultrasound.

7.7d Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Scrotal Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating scrotal disease are given in Table 7-6.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-30
0% to 10% Impairment Due to Scrotal Disease
Subject: 38-year-old man.
History: Injury resulting in loss of all scrotal skin. Good cosmetic result with split-thickness skin graft reconstruction.
Current Symptoms: Discomfort during exercise and certain positions.
Physical Exam: Testicular mobility affected.
Clinical Studies: No testicular malfunction.
Diagnosis: Scrotal skin ablation; split-thickness skin graft scrotal reconstruction.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person (age of subject is considered).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-31
11% to 20% Impairment Due to Scrotal Disease


Subject: 50-year-old man.
History: Extensive burns on lower extremities, geni- tals, and abdomen. Satisfactory skin grafting on abdomen and lower extremities; testicles trans- planted to subcutaneous pouches in the thighs to permit adequate scrotal area skin coverage.
Current Symptoms: Self-conscious about grafted regions.
Physical Exam: Testicles palpable in the thighs.
Clinical Studies: Semen analysis: pending.
Diagnosis: Burn ablation of the scrotum.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person, combine with any fertility impairment.
Comment: Rule out infertility with sperm analysis.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-32
21% to 35% Impairment Due to Scrotal Disease
Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: High-dose external beam pelvic radiation therapy for prostate carcinoma. Apparently cured of cancer 5 years later.
Current Symptoms: Large genitals and weeping skin, which severely limit physical activities.
Physical Exam: Penis and scrotum lymphedema. Clinical Studies: Prostate-specific antigen (PSA): 0 Diagnosis: Postirradiation lymphedema of penile
and scrotal skin.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment of the whole person due to persisting symptoms, lack of effec- tive therapy, and limitation of physical activity.
Comment: No effective treatment.
---END EXAMPLE---
7.7e Testicles, Epididymides, and Spermatic Cords
The testicles produce spermatozoa and synthesize male steroid hormones. The epididymides and sper- matic cords transport the spermatozoa.

Testicular, epididymal, and spermatic cord impair- ment signs and symptoms include local or referred pain; tenderness and change in size, contour, posi- tion, and texture; and testicular hormones and semi- nal fluid abnormalities.

Objective techniques useful in evaluating testicular, epididymal, and spermatic cord function include (but are not limited to) vasography; ultrasound; lymphan- giography; spermatic arteriography and venography; biopsy; semen analysis; and follicle-stimulating, ketosteroid, and hydroxysteroid hormone studies.


7.7f Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Testicular, Epididymal, and Spermatic Cord Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating testicular, epi- didymal, and spermatic cord disease are given in Table 7-7.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-33
0% to 10% Impairment Due to Testicular, Epididymal, and Spermatic Cord Disease
Subject: 36-year-old man.
History: Repeated epididymal orchitis from recur- rent epididymitis. Turned down vas deferens liga- tions. Might want to have children.
Current Symptoms: Pain and swelling of testicles. Physical Exam: Normal prostate; tender testicles. Clinical Studies: Normal seminal fluid.
Diagnosis: Chronic epididymitis secondary to chronic prostatitis.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment due to epi- didymitis and 5% impairment due to prostatitis (age of subject is considered) combine for a 10% whole person impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Prostatic massage and urine cultures to effectively treat urinary tract infection.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-34
11% to 15% Impairment Due to Testicular, Epididymidal, and Spermatic Cord Disease
Subject: 30-year-old man.

History: Bilateral orchitis caused by mumps 2 years ago; bilateral testicular atrophy. Fathered two children.
Current Symptoms: Currently infertile.
Physical Exam: No abnormality.
Clinical Studies: Notable oligospermia on semen analysis.
Diagnosis: Oligospermia.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-35
16% to 20% Impairment Due to Testicular, Epididymal, and Spermatic Cord Disease

Subject: 18-year-old man.
History: Injury caused by farm machinery; amputa- tion of scrotum and its contents. Examined 2 years later when in stable condition.
Current Symptoms: Normal erections; not sexually active.
Physical Exam: Scarred perineal area.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Traumatic orchiectomy.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment due to testicle loss; combine with impairments due to scrotal loss and endocrine gland loss for whole person impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).


7.7g Prostate and Seminal Vesicles
The prostate and seminal vesicles provide the appro- priate nutrition, environment, and transport for sper- matozoa and semen. Impairments associated with urinary functions of the parts of the urethra involved with the prostate and seminal vesicles are discussed in the first part of this chapter on the urethra (Section 7.6).

Symptoms and signs of impairment in the prostate and seminal vesicles include local or referred pain; tenderness; size and textural changes; testicular, epididymal, and spermatic cord function distur- bances; oligospermia; hemospermia; and urinary tract abnormalities.

Objective techniques useful in evaluating prostate and seminal vesicle function include (but are not limited to) urography, endoscopy, prostatic ultrasonography, vasography, biopsy, prostate secretion examination, and hormone excretion pattern analysis.

7.7h Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Prostate and Seminal Vesicle Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating prostate and seminal vesicle disease are given in Table 7-8.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-36
0% to 10% Impairment Due to Prostate and Seminal Vesicle Disease
Subject: 42-year-old man.
History: Acute prostatitis episodes for 10 years.
Current Symptoms: Some mild perineal discomfort requiring pain medication. Fever.
Physical Exam: Tender prostate.
Clinical Studies: Prostatic massage and bacterial cultures.

Diagnosis: Chronic prostatitis with acute febrile episodes.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person (10% – 0.5[10%]).
Comment: May need periodic urine cultures with sensitivity testing to control urinary tract infections.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-37
11% to 15% Impairment Due to Prostate and Seminal Vesicle Disease
Subject: 34-year-old man.
History: Drainage of prostate abscess 15 months ago; continuous prostatitis symptoms and signs tolerated only with constant antibacterial medica- tions.
Current Symptoms: Perineal pain; low-grade fever.
Physical Exam: Tender and enlarged prostate.
Clinical Studies: Hemospermia.
Diagnosis: Recurrent acute and chronic prostatitis.
Impairment Rating: 15% (10% + 0.5[10%]) impairment of the whole person (age of subject is considered).
Comment: If obstructive symptoms, may need cys- toscopic examination and possible TURP.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-38
16% to 20% Impairment Due to Prostate and Seminal Vesicle Disease

Subject: 50-year-old man.
History: Radical prostactectomy for cancer of the prostate.
Current Symptoms: No difficulty in urinating.
Occasional nocturnal incontinence. Some impair- ment of sexual function.
Physical Exam: No anastomotic stricture in the urethra.
Clinical Studies: PSA = 0
Diagnosis: No residual disease after radical prostatectomy.
Impairment Rating: 16% impairment due to prostate and seminal vesicle ablation; combine with impairment for loss of sexual function (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Monitor PSA for recurrence of cancer.
---END EXAMPLE---

7.8 Female Reproductive
	Organs
The female reproductive organs include the vulva, vagina, cervix, uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries. Female reproductive system impairment is influ- enced by age, especially if the woman is of child- bearing age. Consider the physiologic differences between premenopausal and postmenopausal women when evaluating and estimating female reproductive organ impairment.15


7.8a Vulva and Vagina
The vulva has cutaneous, sexual, and urinary func- tions. Urinary function is discussed in the first part of this chapter on the urethra (Section 7.6). The vagina has a sexual function and also serves as a birth pas-


sageway. The clitoris is an erectile organ that has an important role in sexual functioning.

Vulval and vaginal function impairment symptoms and signs include sensation alteration or loss; lubri- cation loss; partial or complete absence; vulvovagini- tis; vulvitis; vaginitis; cicatrization; ulceration; stenosis; atrophy or hypertrophy; neoplasia or dys- plasia; difficulties with sexual intercourse, urination, or vaginal delivery; and underlying perineal structure support defect.


7.8b Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Vulval and Vaginal Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating vulval and vaginal disease are given in Table 7-9.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-39
0% to 15% Impairment Due to Vulval and Vaginal Disease
Subject: 38-year-old woman.
History: Obese; vaginal birth to three living chil- dren. Recurrent chronic genitocrural dermatitis. Treated for intense pruritus and active dermatitis. Discomfort more marked during warm and humid

weather. Symptom remission with control of weight, avoidance of tight clothing, and careful observance of hygienic measures. Satisfying sex- ual intercourse possible when no excessive vulval irritation.
Current Symptoms: Dermatitis improved.
Asymptomatic.
Physical Exam: Slight erythema.
Clinical Studies: Fungal infection culture results: negative. Glucose: normal.
Diagnosis: Dermatitis of the vulva; intertrigo.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-40
16% to 25% Impairment Due to Vulval and Vaginal Disease

Subject: 34-year-old woman.
History: Surgical correction of rectovaginal fistula after vaginal delivery of second child. Severe vaginal stenosis. Intermittent vaginal dilatation under anesthesia; continuous use of vaginal cream. Third pregnancy ended with cesarean sec- tion because vaginal delivery deemed hazardous.
Current Symptoms: Sexual intercourse possible, but painful with no sexual sensation or enjoyment.
Physical Exam: Small and shallow vagina; erythematous.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Severe postoperative vaginal stenosis..
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person (age of subject is considered).

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-41
25% to 35% Impairment Due to Vulval and Vaginal Disease

Subject: 30-year-old woman.
History: Two children. Invasive squamous cell cervi- cal carcinoma. Radiation treatment. Vesicovaginal fistula, rectovaginal fistula, and severe vaginal stenosis. Pregnancy unlikely.
Current Symptoms: Sexual intercourse impossible.
Physical Exam: Vaginal depth 2 cm; sinus tract 5 mm diameter led to cervix. Mucus, feces, and urine discharged through sinus.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Vesicovaginal fistula, rectovaginal fistula, and severe vaginal stenosis.
Impairment Rating: 25% + 10% for age considera- tion = 35% impairment of the whole person.
Combine with appropriate estimates for bladder and rectal impairments to determine impairment for whole person (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: May need urinary diversion.
---END EXAMPLE---

7.8c Cervix and Uterus
The cervix serves as a passageway for spermatozoa and menstrual blood, maintains closure of the uterus during pregnancy, and serves as a portion of the birth canal during vaginal delivery. Hormones, elaborated by the ovaries or administered exogenously, influ- ence the uterus. The uterus serves as the organ of menstruation, a means of spermatozoa transporta- tion, and the container of fertilization products. The uterus supplies the power for the first and third stages of labor and, in part, for the second stage.

Cervical and uterine functional impairment symp- toms and signs include abnormalities of menstrua- tion, fertility, pregnancy, or labor; excessive cervical canal size, stenosis, or atresia; cervical incompetence during pregnancy; noncyclic hemorrhage; uterine displacement; dysplasia; and neoplasia.

Objective techniques useful in evaluating cervical and uterine function include (but are not limited to) cervical mucous studies; vaginal, cervical, and intrauterine cytologic smears; biopsy; ultrasound; radiologic studies using radiopaque contrast media; blood and urine hormone studies; basal body temper- ature recordings; sperm concentration, mobility, and viability studies; uterus dilation and curettage; endometrium microscopic study; gynecography; laparoscopy; computed tomography; magnetic reso- nance imaging; hysteroscopy; ultrasound placental localization techniques; and saline solution sonohys- terography.


7.8d Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Cervical and Uterine Disease
The impairment criteria for evaluating cervical and uterine disease are given in Table 7-10.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-42
0% to 15% Impairment Due to Cervical and Uterine Disease

Subject: 22-year-old woman.
History: Menarche at 14 years. Menstrual periods lasted 3 days, normal volume; no noncyclic bleeding. Pregnant after 11/2 years of marriage; no contraceptives. No leiomyoma growth during pregnancy; no pain associated with tumor.
Healthy 5 lb 12 oz infant delivered at 38 weeks. Menstrual periods after delivery averaged 32 days between cycles; normal volume and duration.
Current Symptoms: None.


Physical Exam: Slight uterine asymmetry on pelvic examination; interior smooth; nontender mass
4 cm in diameter projected from uterus.
Clinical Studies: Leiomyoma confirmed on ultrasound.
Diagnosis: Asymptomatic subserous uterine leiomy- oma.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-43
0% to 15% Impairment Due to Cervical and Uterine Disease
Subject: 60-year-old woman.
History: Adenomyosis; vaginal hysterectomy 20 years previously; vaginal vault prolapse.
Current Symptoms: Pelvic pressure; large bulge protruding from vulva.
Physical Exam: Vaginal vault prolapse; no signifi- cant rectocele, cystocele, or uterine-vaginal angle descent.
Clinical Studies: Discharge: no infection. Diagnosis: Posthysterectomy vaginal vault prolapse. Impairment Rating: 15% uterine loss impairment;
combine with impairment for vaginal prolapse to
determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Preferred nonoperative approach.
Doughnut pessary reduced vaginal prolapse; pes- sary changed twice weekly. Povidone-iodine douche diminished vaginal discharge. Symptoms resolved.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-44
16% to 25% Impairment Due to Cervical and Uterine Disease
Subject: 30-year-old woman.

History: Cervical conization. Para 2. Partial cervical stenosis; menstrual blood retention. Cervical dila- tion necessary at 2- to 4-month intervals due to hematometria and dysmenorrhea. Pregnant 2 years after conization. Infant delivered by cesarean section before labor onset at 38 weeks; abruptio placentae.
Current Symptoms: Requires cervical dilation at 2-month intervals.
Physical Exam: Narrowed cervix.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Incomplete cervical stenosis.
Impairment Rating: 16% impairment of the whole person.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-45
26% to 35% Impairment Due to Cervical and Uterine Disease

Subject: 34-year-old woman.
History: Severe uterine prolapse due to vaginal delivery of large infant after long, difficult labor. Surgical anterior and posterior vaginal wall repair, extensive cervical amputation, and posterior uter- ine fixation by broad ligament plication.
Current Symptoms: Three carefully managed, subsequent pregnancies each ended in sponta- neous abortion between 12 and 16 weeks’ gestation due to premature cervical dilation.
Physical Exam: Large, prolapsed uterus.
Clinical Studies: Pap smear: pending.
Diagnosis: Partial cervical absence and incompetence; uterine prolapse.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment due to cervi- cal incompetence.
Comment: Incompetent cervix repair impossible due to partial cervical absence.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-46
26% to 35% Impairment Due to Cervical and Uterine Disease
Subject: 28-year-old woman.
History: Gravida 0. Stage IB invasive cervical squa- mous cell carcinoma. Lymph nodes did not show metastatic disease. Radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy; ovaries conserved.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic.
Physical Exam: Normal vagina.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: No uterus in a reproductive-age woman secondary to treatment of invasive cervical squa- mous cell carcinoma.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment of the whole person.


7.8 e Fallopian Tubes and Ovaries
The fallopian tubes transport ova and spermatozoa. The ovaries develop and release ova and secrete sex and reproductive hormones.

Symptoms and signs of fallopian tube and ovarian dysfunction include vaginal bleeding or discharge; fallopian tube stenosis or obstruction; abnormal mor- phologic characteristics; pelvic masses; neoplasms; absent, infrequent, or abnormal ovulation; abnormal hormone secretion; and menstrual dysfunction.

Objective techniques useful in evaluating fallopian tube and ovarian function include (but are not limited to) cervical and vaginal cytologic smears; pelvic roentgenography; hysterosalpingography; gynecog- raphy; ovarian biopsy; blood and urine hormonal assays; ultrasound; computed tomography; magnetic resonance imaging; laparoscopy; and basal body temperature studies.


7.8f Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Fallopian Tube and Ovarian Disease
Evaluate any associated endocrine impairment in accordance with the criteria set forth in the Guides Chapter 10, The Endocrine System.

The impairment criteria for evaluating fallopian tube and ovarian disease are given in Table 7-11.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-47
0% to 15% Impairment Due to Fallopian Tube and Ovarian Disease

Subject: 28-year-old woman.
History: No pregnancy after 6 years of marriage.
Average frequency of sexual intercourse; no con- traceptives. Menstruated every 40 to 60 days since menarche at age 12. Administered clomiphene cit- rate to induce ovulation; conceived in second cycle. Delivered healthy, full-term infant.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Bilateral tubal patency on hys- terosalpingogram. Normal sperm count on hus- band’s semen analysis.
Diagnosis: Irregular ovulation secondary to hypo- thalamic-pituitary dysfunction.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-48
16% to 25% Impairment Due to Fallopian Tube and Ovarian Disease

Subject: 27-year-old woman.
History: Two children. Increasing pain secondary to severe pelvic endometriosis. Laparotomy for bilateral ovarian endometriomas resection, peri- toneal implant resection and fulguration; presacral neurectomy. Normal pregnancy resulting in birth of healthy infant. Breast-fed for 14 months.
Continuous medical therapy for chronic, recurring pain suppression.
Current Symptoms: Pelvic pain secondary to recur- rent endometriosis.
Physical Exam: Tender uterus and adnexae.
Clinical Studies: Cultures: no infection.
Diagnosis: Recurrent pelvic endometriosis.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-49
26% to 35% Impairment Due to Fallopian Tube and Ovarian Disease
Subject: 32-year-old woman.
History: Two children.
Current Symptoms: Severe pelvic infection.
Physical Exam: Uterus: normal size; enlarged tubes bilaterally.
Clinical Studies: Total proximal and distal fallopian tube occlusion; bilateral 6-cm hydrosalpinx.
Bilateral salpingectomy.
Diagnosis: Bilateral salpingectomy.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment of the whole person.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 7-50
26% to 35% Impairment Due to Fallopian Tube and Ovarian Disease

Subject: 27-year-old woman.
History: Childhood Wilms tumor; radical nephrec- tomy; chemotherapy and abdominal radiation.
Current Symptoms: Erratic menstruation. Never pregnant. No pregnancy after 5 years of unpro- tected intercourse.
Physical Exam: Nephrectomy scar.
Clinical Studies: Normal sperm count on husband’s semen analysis. Bilateral tubal patency on hys- terosalpingogram. Primary ovarian failure on hor- monal studies.
Diagnosis: Infertility due to primary ovarian failure.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment due to loss of ovarian function (age of subject is considered); combine with appropriate impairment rating for upper urinary tract disorder for impairment of
the whole person (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604)


7.9 Urinary and Reproductive Systems Impairment
	Evaluation Summary

Table 7-12 gives an evaluation summary for the assessment of urinary and reproduction systems impairment.






================================================================================
Chapter 8: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
8.1 Principles of Assessment
8.2 Disfigurement
8.3 Scars and Skin Grafts
8.4 Contact Dermatitis
8.5 Natural Rubber Latex Allergy
8.6 Skin Cancer
8.7 Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Skin Disorders
8.8 Skin Impairment Evaluation Summary
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating perma- nent impairment of the skin and its appendages and estimating the extent to which skin impairments affect the ability to perform activities of daily living (see Table 1-2). Permanent impairment of the skin is any dermatologic abnormality or loss that persists after medical treatment and rehabilitation and that is unlikely to change significantly in the next year, with or without medical treatment.

Table 8-1 summarizes skin components, functions, and disorders. Skin functions include: (1) providing a protective covering; (2) participating in sensory perception, temperature regulation, fluid regulation, electrolyte balance, immunobiologic defenses, and trauma resistance; and (3) regenerating the epidermis and its appendages.


173


*Modified from Mathias,5 Table 10-7, p. 138.


Protective skin functions include barrier defenses against chemical irritant and allergic sensitizer damage, microorganism invasion, and ultraviolet light injuries. Temperature regulation involves proper sweat gland and small blood vessel functioning. The barrier defense against fluid loss is related to the intactness of the stratum corneum.

Revisions from the fourth edition include: (1) new sections on contact dermatitis and natural rubber latex allergy; (2) a new section on cancer; and (3) updated clinical information and references.


8.1 Principles of
	Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for per- forming and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

Skin disorders may develop from exposure to physi- cal, mechanical, biological, and chemical agents.
Identification and avoidance of these agents may pre- vent ongoing skin disorder aggravation. Physicians need to determine the clinical course and permanence

of skin disorders associated with possible intermittent exposures.

Clinical evaluation requires sound clinical judgment based on a detailed medical history, thorough physi- cal examination, and judicious use of diagnostic pro- cedures. Ancillary diagnostic and laboratory procedures include patch, open, prick, intracuta- neous, and serologic allergy tests; Wood’s light examinations, cultures, and scrapings for bacteria, fungi, and viruses; and biopsies.

To determine the appropriate impairment class (Table 8-2) for an affected individual, evaluate the severity of the skin condition and the impact of the skin con- dition on the ability to perform activities of daily liv- ing (see Table 1-2). Determine the appropriate percentage within any impairment class by consider- ing the frequency, intensity, and complexity of the medical condition and the treatment regimen. In gen- eral, the more frequent and intense the symptoms, signs, and medical treatment, the higher the estimated impairment rating within any impairment class. Table 8-2 lists the impairment classes and percents of whole person impairment for all dermatologic disorders. A brief overview of those disorders follows.

Impairments of other body systems, such as behav- ioral problems, restriction of motion or ankylosis of joints, and respiratory, cardiovascular, endocrine, or gastrointestinal tract disorders, may be associated


with skin impairments. When there is a permanent impairment of more than one body system, evaluate the extent of whole person impairment related to each system and combine the estimated impairment percentages (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine total impairment.


8.1a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
In some cases, limitations in the ability to perform daily activities are based on symptoms. This infor- mation may be subjective and possibly misinter- preted, and it should not serve as the sole criterion for impairment rating decisions. Rather, obtain objective data about the extent of the limitation and integrate findings with subjective data to estimate the permanent impairment rating.


8.1a.1 Pruritus
Pruritus is a common symptom of dermatologic con- ditions. Pruritus is a subjective, unpleasant sensation and symptom that provokes the desire to scratch and rub the skin. The itching sensation may be intolera- ble. Pruritus is closely related to pain and is medi- ated by pain receptors and fibers when they are weakly stimulated. Like pain, pruritus may be defined as a unique complex of afferent stimuli that interacts with the individual’s emotional or affective state of mind.

The pruritus sensation has two elements that are extremely variable in makeup and time. Peripheral neural stimulation varies from the absence of sensa- tion to awareness that stimuli are producing a usual or unusual sensation. Central nervous system reac- tion is modified by state of attentiveness, experience, motivation at the moment, and such stimuli as exer- cise, sweat, and temperature change.

When evaluating pruritus associated with skin disor- ders, consider (1) how the pruritus interferes with performance of the activities of daily living, and (2) to what extent the pruritus description is supported by such objective skin signs as lichenification, exco- riation, or hyperpigmentation. Subjective itching complaints that cannot be substantiated objectively may require referral or consultation.


8.1b Description of Procedures
Common clinical investigations for dermatologic conditions include skin testing, biopsy, and relevant laboratory studies.
8.1
b.1 Patch Testing, Performance, Interpretation, and Relevance
The sine qua non for the diagnosis of allergic contact dermatitis is a properly performed and interpreted patch test. The information from patch testing com- plements an appropriate, detailed history. Patch test- ing may significantly contribute to the diagnosis and management of contact dermatitis.

Be aware that patch testing may yield false-positive and false-negative results. Selecting the proper con- centration of the suspected allergen, vehicle, site of application, and type of patch is critical for proce- dure validity. Making such selections and determin- ing test result relevance require considerable skill and experience.

Interpret a positive or negative patch test result in conjunction with the clinical history and a detailed knowledge of testing procedures. Although appropri- ate test concentrations and vehicles have been estab- lished for many sensitizers, there are no established vehicle and concentration standards for the vast number of chemicals in use.

Patch test results require careful interpretation to dis- cern allergic from irritant responses, as well as to appropriately interpret whether the result is relevant to the individual’s dermatitis and exposures. Patch tests are only used to detect contact allergy and are only one component in a complete evaluation.
Further details about patch testing, its values, and its limitations are discussed in standard texts, some of which are listed at the end of this chapter.


8.2  Disfigurement
Skin disfigurement is an altered or abnormal appearance that may be an alteration of color, shape, or structure, or a combination of these.
Disfigurement may be a residual of injury or disease, or it may accompany a recurrent or ongoing disorder. Examples of disfigurement include giant pigmented nevi, nevus flammeus, cavernous hemangioma, and pigmentation alteration.

Disfigurement usually has no effect on body function and may have little or no effect on the ability to per- form activities of daily living, except if the disfigure- ment causes social rejection or an unfavorable
self-image with self-imposed isolation, lifestyle alteration, or other behavioral changes. If impairment in the ability to perform activities of daily living due


to disfigurement does exist, it is usually manifested by a behavior change, such as withdrawal from social contacts. Behavioral changes are evaluated in accordance with the criteria in the Guides Chapter 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders.

Evaluate impairments related to disfigurement or altered pigmentation in accordance with the criteria given in Table 8-2 and described later in this chapter. Enhance disfigurement descriptions with good color photographs that show multiple defect views.
Estimate the probable duration and permanency of the disfigurement. Describe in writing the possibility of improving the condition through medical or surgi- cal therapy and the extent to which it can be con- cealed cosmetically, as with hairpieces, wigs, or cosmetics. Depict with photographs if possible.

Evaluate the effect on the performance of the activi- ties of daily living if a scar involves the loss of sweat gland function, hair growth, nail growth, or pigment formation. Evaluate burns and scars according to the criteria in this chapter; give special consideration to the injury’s impact on the individual’s ability to per- form activities of daily living. When impairment resulting from a burn or scar is based on peripheral nerve dysfunction or loss of range of motion, evalu- ate the skin impairment separately and combine the impairment rating with that from Chapters 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System; 16, The Upper Extremities; or 17, The Lower Extremities. If chest wall excursion is limited or if there are behav- ioral changes secondary to disfigurement, consult Chapter 5, The Respiratory System, or Chapter 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders.


8.3  Scars and Skin Grafts
Scars, cutaneous abnormalities that result from the healing of burned, traumatized, or diseased tissue, represent a special type of disfigurement. Give the scars’ dimensions in centimeters, and describe their shape, color, anatomic location, and any evidence of ulceration, depression, or elevation. Indicate whether the scar is “atrophic” or “hypertrophic”; soft and pli- able or hard and indurated, thin or thick, and smooth or rough; and attachment, if any, to underlying bones, joints, muscles, or other tissue. Good color photographs with multiple views of the defect enhance the scars’ description.

Consider the tendency of a scar to disfigure when evaluating whether there is permanent impairment due to scarring. Also consider whether the scar can be changed, made less visible, or concealed.
Function may be restored without improving appear- ance, and appearance may be improved without altering function.

Skin grafts may be used to replace skin losses result- ing from trauma or disease. Grafts commonly lack hair, lubrication, pliability, and sensation, and they may demonstrate altered pigmentation. These changes affect the function and appearance of the graft site. The altered lubrication, pliability, and sen- sation may result in diminished protection against microorganisms and diminished resistance to mechanical, chemical, and thermal trauma. The altered appearance may be significant if the area involves exposed parts, such as the dorsum of the hand, the face, or the neck.
8.4
 Contact Dermatitis
Contact dermatitis is an inflammatory skin reaction induced by exposure to an external agent and is the most frequent cause of occupational skin disease.
Contact dermatitis most often involves the hands, wrists, and forearms, although any area may be affected. Two types of contact dermatitis are gener- ally recognized: irritant (80% of cases), which results from direct tissue damage, and allergic (20% of cases), in which tissue damage is mediated through type IV delayed cellular hypersensitivity.
Irritant and allergic contact dermatitis may coexist in the same person and are often difficult to differenti- ate on physical examination and histologically.

Irritants may be strong (absolute) or weak (marginal). Cumulative exposure to marginal irritants causes most cases of contact dermatitis and may impair the barrier function of the skin, allowing the penetration of potential allergens. Many cutaneous allergens, such as chromates, nickel salts, epoxy resins, and preservatives, are also primary irritants. Allergy can be induced or maintained by chemicals in concentra- tions insufficient to irritate nonallergic skin. Allergen cross-sensitivity is an important phenomenon in which an individual who is allergic to one chemical (eg, urushiol in poison ivy or poison oak) also will react to structurally related chemicals (eg, in Japanese lacquer, mango, and cashew nutshell oil).


Accurate diagnosis is the key to proper management of contact dermatitis. If the specific agent(s) can be identified (see section on patch testing) and success- fully avoided, full recovery usually is anticipated; but if contact continues, the dermatitis may become chronic and disabling, and it may prevent the indi- vidual from performing some activities of daily living.


8.5 Natural Rubber
	Latex Allergy
Latex allergy generally refers to an IgE-mediated immediate hypersensitivity reaction to one or more protein allergens present in natural rubber latex (NRL) devices, especially gloves. Individuals with spina bifida and health care workers are at particular risk; NRL allergy has become a significant medical and occupational health problem. Clinical manifesta- tions range from contact urticaria and angioedema to allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis, asthma, and ana- phylaxis. Contact dermatitis to rubber accelerators and antioxidants added during manufacture has been associated with NRL allergy. A number of NRL- allergic individuals are atopic, with asthma, other environmental type I allergies, and hand eczema.
Symptoms and signs of contact urticaria to NRL may be masked by preexisting hand eczema. Also evalu- ate individuals with NRL allergy for manifestions in other organ systems (eg, respiratory symptoms and asthma). See Chapter 5, The Respiratory System, for an example of NRL-induced asthma.

Allergen avoidance is the current treatment for NRL allergy. When aerosolized, glove powder (an NRL- allergen carrier) can produce respiratory symptoms in susceptible individuals. Affected workers may have to avoid contact with NRL gloves and other NRL-containing products, avoid areas where they might inhale the powder from NRL gloves worn by other workers, and wear a medical alert bracelet.
8.6
 Skin Cancer
Skin cancer is the most prevalent of all cancers. Three main types exist: basal cell carcinoma, squa- mous cell carcinoma, and malignant melanoma.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common form of skin cancer. Predisposing factors include light skin color, inability to tan, sun exposure, blond or red hair, freckling in childhood, therapeutic radia- tion, and arsenic exposure. Several different clinical and histologic types exist; there is also a much less common, inherited condition called the basal cell nevus or Gorlin syndrome. BCC is usually locally invasive, with a small metastatic potential. The main goal of therapy is complete eradication of the tumor with the highest cure rate and the least amount of disfigurement.

Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) makes up about one fifth of nonmelanoma skin cancers. SCC is more common in individuals with light skin coloration and can arise from excess sun exposure, leading to precancerous actinic keratoses. Environmental risk factors include arsenic, polycyclic aromatic hydro- carbon, chronic infrared heat, and therapeutic radia- tion exposure. SCC may also occur in chronic scars from burns, trauma, and inflammatory processes.
Several clinical and histologic types exist, but SCC is more likely to metastasize, especially from sites involving the lip, dorsal hand, and temple, as well
as in larger, deeper, and more anaplastic lesions. Therapeutic options are the same as for basal cell carcinoma. Sun avoidance and close follow-up are essential in patients with SCC.

Cutaneous malignant melanoma is an increasingly common and lethal malignancy of melanocytes and nevus cells in certain precursor lesions. The increased frequency of melanoma is well docu- mented; rates of incidence are rising more rapidly for this than for any other cancer. The salient challenge for clinicians is to detect and excise melanoma in its earliest stage, as tumor thickness remains the most important prognostic indicator of this malignancy.
Early diagnosis and surgical excision of in situ, or early invasive, melanomas are curative in most indi- viduals. Despite advances in chemotherapy and immunotherapy, the efficacy of treatment of advanced melanoma remains limited, and the prog- nosis of metastatic disease remains guarded.


8.7 Criteria for Rating Permanent
Impairment Due to
	Skin Disorders
The impairment criteria for all dermatologic disorders are given in Table 8-2.


*The signs and symptoms of disorders in classes 1, 2, and 3 may be intermittent and not present at the time of examination. Consider the impact of the skin disorder on the ability to perform activities of daily living (see Table 1-2) in determining the class of impairment. Consider the frequency and intensity of signs and symptoms (ie, severity) and the frequency and complexity of medical treatment when selecting an appropriate impairment percentage and estimate within any class (see Introduction).

Current Symptoms: None.
Physical Exam: Hands and arms: no signs of der- matitis.
Clinical Studies: Patch test: strong allergic reaction to 0.1% petrolatum mixture of a nonmercurial preser- vative, 2-n-4-isothiazolin-3-one, used in company’s latex paints. Subsequent evaluation: normal.
Diagnosis: Resolved allergic contact dermatitis caused by preservative.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-1
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Allergic Contact Dermatitis
Subject: 27-year-old man.
History: Prepared batches of latex paint for small paint manufacturing company. Related skin dis- ease onset and exacerbation. Despite some accommodations, individual unable to avoid latex paint completely; dermatitis continued. No der- matitis for 1 year after job change.

Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: While used widely in paint manufactur- ing, the preservative is not used in other industries where the worker might come into contact with it. No limitation in the performance of daily activi- ties. Latex paint does not contain natural rubber latex (NRL) allergens and does not cause NRL allergy.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-2
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Thermal Burn Scarring

Subject: 38-year-old woman.
History: Second-degree flame burn to forearm; spontaneously healed.
Current Symptoms: None.
Physical Exam: 7 x 12-cm depigmented area of the arm. Healed skin: normal pliability, lubrication, and sensation.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Scarring caused by thermal burn.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: No interference with activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-3
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Allergic Contact Dermatitis and Occupational Leukoderma

Subject: 52-year-old man.
History: Janitor; 13 years’ transient hand dermatitis from wet work with detergents, including germi- cidal disinfectant with paratertiary butyl phenol (TBP). Developed depigmentation on sides of most fingers, dorsa of the hands, and distal fore- arms 10 years ago. Recent depigmentation of upper torso and thighs. Ultraviolet light therapy with oral methoxsalen (PUVA therapy) over 1 year failed to stimulate repigmentation. Cosmetic covering unsatisfactory. Required outdoor mainte- nance work resulted in frequent sunburn of skin that lacked pigmentation; needs frequent and reg- ular use of protective sunscreen.
Current Symptoms: None; not bothered by skin changes.
Physical Exam: Depigmentation. Early actinic changes with skin wrinkling, bruising, and scaling.
Clinical Studies: Patch test: 2+ reaction to TBP 1% in petrolatum; no other common industrial aller- gens. Positive patch site depigmented 1 month later.
Diagnosis: Allergic contact dermatitis and occupa- tional leukoderma caused by phenolic chemical, TBP.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.

Comment: Impairment estimate includes modifica- tion of only a few activities of daily living by lim- iting exposure to sunlight. No effect on self-image or social relationships.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-4
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Chronic Urticaria


Subject: 35-year-old woman.
History: 10 years’ chronic urticaria (hives); no angioedema or ER visits due to related symptoms.
Current Symptoms: Hand lesions; swelling occa- sionally interferes with driving or grasping objects. Lesions; severe itching rarely interferes with sleep, sexual relations, concentration, and activities of daily living. Asyptomatic with regular nonsedating antihistimine use.
Physical Exam: Without treatment, daily urticarial lesions on 10% to 20% of body surface area (BSA): hands, face, or trunk.
Clinical Studies: Blood smear (200 white blood cells counted): 12% eosinophils.
Diagnosis: Chronic urticaria.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: No limitation in daily activities with current treatment. If sedating antihistamine treat- ment, ability to perform certain activities—driv- ing or participating in group activities—possibly limited; estimated impairment rating might increase. If change necessary, reevaluate impair- ment rating. If urticaria uncontrollable, possible 20% impairment estimate.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-5
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Allergic Contact Dermatitis
Subject: 32-year-old man.
History: Construction worker; blistering dermatitis of hands and feet after work with wet concrete. Severe dermatitis twice treated with oral pred- nisone. Condition improved away from concrete contact but did not clear completely.
Current Symptoms: Daily chronic dermatitis with occasional exacerbations. Requires intermittent treatment. Performs most but avoids some activi- ties of daily living; avoids contact with water; normal sleep. Handling dry rock or concrete usu- ally aggravates dermatitis.
Physical Exam: Initial severe dermatitis; without exposure, mild dermatitis of fingers, palms, and feet.
Clinical Studies: Patch test: allergic contact der- matitis to chromate, principal allergen in cement and leather shoes.
Diagnosis: Allergic contact dermatitis to chromate from occupational cement exposure.
Impairment Rating: 9% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Limitation of few activities of daily liv- ing, but daily chronic dermatitis requires intermit- tent treatment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-6
10% to 24% Impairment Due to Chronic Dermatitis
Subject: 28-year-old woman.
History: Eczematous eruption beneath wedding ring on fourth finger of left hand shortly after birth of first child 6 years earlier. Gradually spread to areas on several fingers of both hands despite treatment and avoidance of jewelry use. Eruption persisted for several months, then subsided slowly. Severe hand dermatitis flare-up after birth

of second child 2 years later. No eczema, hay fever, or asthma; no family history of atopy.
Current Symptoms: Good general health. Chronic, low-grade dermatitis despite special precautions. Intermittent treatment required to control dermati- tis. Chronic hand dermatitis causes intermittent discomfort and limits some activities of daily liv- ing (eg, dishwashing, childcare, and grasping).
Physical Exam: Scarring and lichenification; other- wise normal.
Clinical Studies: Patch test: various food, house- hold, cosmetic, and diagnostic and therapeutic materials nonreactive. Basic labs: normal.
Diagnosis: Chronic dermatitis of the hands due to undetermined factors.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Chronic dermatitis and impairment of some daily activities indicate class 2. Intermittent nature of symptoms and treatment needed warrant 10% impairment rating.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-7
10% to 24% Impairment Due to Thermal Burn Hypertrophic Scarring

Subject: 43-year-old man.
History: Healed second-degree burn of anterior part of neck; hypertrophic scar formation involves approximately 1% of body surface area.
Current Symptoms: Scar susceptible to ultraviolet light; wears sun blockers when outdoors. Scar easily irritated and lacks durability; unable to wear clothes that rub neck. Intermittent itching and burning episodes confined to scarred areas stops all activities for 5 to 10 minutes.
Physical Exam: Scar raised, red, hard, and contrasts markedly with adjacent normal skin. Limited neck flexion, extension.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Hypertrophic scar secondary to thermal burn; limitation of neck motion.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Itching and burning temporarily interrupt some activities of daily living; no treatment is required. Combine skin impairment with the esti- mated impairment rating for loss of neck motion (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine total impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-8
10% to 24% Impairment Due to Latex Allergy and Eczema

Subject: 38-year-old woman.
History: Dental assistant; 18 years’ progressively severe chronic hand dermatitis, angioedema of the face, rhinitis, and asthma; flared with powdered natural rubber latex (NRL) gloves. Treatment of topical and systemic corticosteroids. Eczema; jew- elry allergy. Some lotions, creams, frequent anti- bacterial soap hand washing aggravate dermatitis. Nonpowdered NRL gloves cause itching within minutes, hives on wrists and forearms. Visited urgent care center for disseminated urticaria, angioedema, and wheezing.
Current Symptoms: Temporary improvement with hypoallergenic, powder-free NRL gloves. With no NRL exposure, mild hand dermatitis persists; intermittent fingertip fissuring. Occasional diffi- culty grasping and holding instruments; occasion- ally uses topical corticosteroids and hand creams. Asthma improved but persists despite use of non- NRL gloves by all office employees.
Physical Exam: Red, swollen, crusted, fissured palms, fingers, and wrists.
Clinical Studies: Patch test: positive reactions to thi- uram mix (rubber chemical accelerators in NRL gloves), glutaraldehyde (active ingredient in cold sterilizing solution), and quaternuim-15 (preserva- tive in hand lotions). Latex RAST (Pharmacia CAP): positive (class 3). Prick test: confirmed latex allergy to NRL, bananas, avocado, house dust mites, and various molds.
Diagnosis: Latex allergy and allergic and irritant contact hand eczema.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Persistent dermatitis limits some activi- ties of daily living; intermittent to constant treat- ment needed. Allergen avoidance information includes: non-NRL gloves list, methods of avoid- ing skin and inhalation contact with glutaralde- hyde, quaternium-15–free hand lotion, and methods to avoid NRL exposure at both work and home. Prescription for Epi-Pen (auto- injectable epinephrine). Referred to allergist due to worsening rhinitis, asthma, and banana allergy. Determine impairment due to rhinitis and asthma separately and combine with skin impairment rating (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604)
to determine total impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-9
10% to 24% Impairment Due to Atopic Dermatitis


Subject: 25-year-old man.
History: Family history of eczema, hay fever; per- sonal history of infantile eczema with chronic, intermittent, oozing lesions of face, scalp, neck, and upper extremities. Persistent lichenified patches in antecubital, popliteal, and neck areas during remissions. Severe exacerbations during high school; frequency increased during college.
Current Symptoms: Exacerbations once a month for 7 to 10 days; involves shoulders, arms, hands, legs, and trunk. Eczema during exacerbations limits some activities of daily living: difficulty sleeping, washing dishes, and concentrating on complex tasks. Lichenified dermatitis an annoy- ance but does not significantly limit daily activi- ties. Intermittent application of topical steroid creams during relative remissions. Constant topical steroids, antihistamines, and oatmeal starch baths during flare-ups. Systemic steroids once a year induce remissions.
Physical Exam: Lichenified areas at lateral aspects of neck and arm, leg creases.
Clinical Studies: Basic labs: normal.
Diagnosis: Atopic dermatitis.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Atopic dermatitis exacerbations precipi- tated by variety of agents. Estimated impairment based on occasional interference with some activi- ties of daily living, frequency and severity of signs and symptoms, and need for and complexity of medical treatment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-10
10% to 24% Impairment Due to Nail Dystrophy and Anonychia

Subject: 40-year-old woman.
History: Swelling, redness of eponychial, parony- chial areas of all fingers; severe pain, paresthesia after repeated use of sculptured artificial nail kit consisting of liquid methyl methacrylate monomer and powdered methyl methacrylate polymer. Lost nails on all 10 fingers. Individual observed for several years; no fingernail regrowth.


Current Symptoms: Persistent paresthesia; diffi- culty grasping small objects such as coins; cold sensitivity, burning, and tingling. Other nonspe- cialized hand activities aggravate symptoms.
Wears adhesive bandages over petroleum jelly on nail beds; wears gloves most waking hours.
Woman anxious and depressed; requires occa- sional psychiatric consultation.
Physical Exam: Exposed and keratinized nail beds; paronychial areas swollen and tender.
Clinical Studies: Patch test: positive; 2% methyl methacrylate monomer in petrolatum.
Diagnosis: Chemically induced nail dystrophy and anonychia.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment due to chemi- cally induced nail dystrophy.
Comment: Combine with appropriate value for the paresthesia (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment. Any men- tal and behavioral impairment would increase the whole person impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-11
10% to 24% Impairment Due to Zirconium Chloride Burn and Leukoderma

Subject: 30-year-old man.
History: At work splashed with concentrated liquid zirconium chloride over face, scalp, and neck.
Despite immediate irrigation, hospitalized for 2 days for chemical burn. Healing and epithelializa- tion occurred without complications; returned to work 22 days after episode. Months later, depig- mentation occurred.
Current Symptoms: Depigmented areas sunburn easily, with considerable discomfort, restricting ability to work. Contact with heat (eg, hot show- ers, extremely warm days, or work as kiln opera- tor) cause marked stinging sensation within affected skin areas, requiring cessation of all activ- ities for 10 to 15 minutes until pain subsides.
Occasional muscle twitching and severe discom- fort occur within the affected areas, waking indi- vidual from sleep once or twice a week.
Experiences considerable embarrassment when attempting to explain disfigurement; avoids some social activities previously participated in.

Physical Exam: Pigment loss, hyperesthesia, and intolerance to sunlight and warmth. Well-
demarcated areas of depigmentation with borders of hyperpigmentation, surrounding right side of the face (behind right ear to center of face, from midtemple area of scalp to chin, and on left side of neck and behind right ear). Maximum dimen- sions of depigmented areas on right side of face 16 x 11 cm. Neurologic examination: all depig- mented areas hypersensitive to cold, heat, pin- prick, and touch.
Clinical Studies: Basic labs: normal.
Diagnosis: Zirconium chloride burn and leukoderma with residual skin dysfunction.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Percentage of cutaneous impairment reflects decreased ability to perform some activi- ties of daily living. Frequent occurrence of intense signs and symptoms, which precludes the per- formance of various activities, merits a rating at the upper end of class 2 impairment. If effective medical treatment were available to reduce fre- quency and intensity of signs and symptoms, esti- mated impairment percentage could be reduced. Behavioral changes exhibited by individual should be evaluated according to the criteria described in the Guides Chapter 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders; any psychiatric impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) would be combined with the skin impairment to determine whole person impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-12
25% to 54% Impairment Due to Neurodermatitis and Occupational Contact Dermatitis

Subject: 45-year-old man.
History: Nurseryman; exposure to many irritant pesticides. 6 years’ persistent, pruritic dermatitis involving ankles, forearms, hands, and occasion- ally face and neck. Recurrent pyogenic infection with occasional regional lymph node swelling and tenderness. Dermatitis initially responded to topi- cal therapy and irritant avoidance; condition flared up after reexposure. Symptoms continued despite job change, avoidance of incriminated agents. No prior dermatologic problem.
Noteworthy: 3 years’ headache, memory loss, and anxiety with nausea and vomiting. Intermittent psychological counseling with some relief; little neurodermatitis improvement.
Current Symptoms: Neurodermatitis (itch-scratch syndrome); warm environments, sweating, chemi- cal irritants, and stress provoke severe itching.
Physical Exam: Weeping, excoriated, lichenified plaques and patches of eczema of the face, arms, and hands. Axillary adenopathy.
Clinical Studies: Patch tests: negative to standard tray and work chemicals. Bacterial culture of skin drainage: Staphylococcus aureus, coagulase posi- tive.
Diagnosis: Persistent neurodermatitis secondary to occupational contact dermatitis.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment due to the skin disorder; combine with an estimated mental and behavioral impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impair- ment.
Comment: Unable to fully perform usual activities of daily living or participate in social and recreational activities; difficulty sleeping.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-13
25% to 54% Impairment Due to Thermal Burn Scarring


Subject: 44-year-old man.
History: Burns to dorsum of both hands and feet; required grafting.
Current Symptoms: Well-healed grafts; residual dry- ness and cracking, easily injured by minor trauma, noxious chemicals. Bathes, shampoos with gloves on since water and soap irritate hands. Trouble grasping toothbrush, comb, or writing instrument due to cracking, decreased sensation, and skin stiff- ness. Feet uncomfortable in leather shoes; wears cloth shoes. Intermittent moisturizer use.
Physical Exam: Dry, somewhat atrophic, and stiff grafts on hands and feet.
Clinical Studies: Basic labs: normal.
Diagnosis: Scarring due to thermal burns.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Many activities of daily living limited. Intermittent treatment and symptoms place him at the lower end of class 3.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-14
25% to 54% Impairment Due to Follicular Occlusive Triad


Subject: 28-year-old man.
History: 12 years’ acne vulgaris, hidradenitis suppu- rativa, and dissecting cellulitis of the scalp (follic- ular occlusive triad). Temporary improvement with topical and systemic antibiotics, intralesional corticosteroids, aspiration, marsupialization, zinc sulfate, and two courses of isotretinoin. Last 5 years, developed large cystic lesions, mainly involving posterior scalp, face, neck, upper trunk, axilla, and inguinal area.
Current Symptoms: Lesions accompanied by fever and aching joints. Large lesions on back, chest, and scalp and in the inguinal area make resting difficult in warm weather. Clothing and sweating aggravate disorder. Difficulty sleeping, participat- ing in social and recreational activities, and main- taining regular employment.
Physical Exam: Inflamed cystic lesions located on posterior scalp, face, neck, upper trunk, axilla, and inguinal area. Skin severely scarred.
Clinical Studies: White blood cell count: 22.0 ?
109L (22.0 ? 103/µL).


Diagnosis: Acne conglobata; hidradenitis suppura- tiva; dissecting cellulitis of the scalp; severe scar formation.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Many activities of daily living limited.
Requires frequent systemic antibodies.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-15
25% to 54% Impairment Due to Pemphigus Vulgaris

Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: 22 months’ persistently sore mouth.
Vesicles and bullae over face, trunk, and extremi- ties. High doses of oral corticosteroids adminis- tered to control disease.
Current Symptoms: Persistent blisters and erosions result in chronic, unremitting pain on swallowing or speaking. Erosions and skin fragility involving mouth, trunk, and genital area; unable to have sexual intercourse, eat solid foods, brush teeth, speak above a whisper, or sleep. Azathioprine therapy added to high-dose corticosteroids; lim- ited disease control. Complex therapy requires frequent physician visits for checkups and labora- tory monitoring.
Physical Exam: Many eroded lesions of tongue and oral mucous membranes; lesions over trunk and extremities. Infected bullae of mouth and trunk; increased systolic blood pressure.
Clinical Studies: White blood cell count: leukopenia (secondary to therapy). Biopsy: pemphigus vulgaris.
Diagnosis: Pemphigus vulgaris.
Impairment Rating: 45% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Interference with many activities of daily living due to lesions and pemphigus pain. Therapy led to leukopenia (see Chapter 9, The Hematopoietic System, for further impairment).
Combine impairments of several organ systems (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine the whole person impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-16
55% to 84% Impairment Due to Skin Cancer


Subject: 40-year-old man.
History: Laborer; noted to have multiple basal cell carcinomas since age 15 involving both exposed and covered body areas. History of cardiac fibromas.
Current Symptoms: Multiple draining lesions on trunk; reclusive behavior because of inability to go into the sun. Need for continuous surgical removal of skin tumors. Loss of self-esteem.
Physical Exam: Multiple nodular and ulcerated dome-shaped tumors of face and trunk with sero- sanguineous foul-smelling drainage. Palmar and plantar pits and facial milia.
Clinical Studies: Skin biopsies: basal cell carcinoma.
Radiographs: macrocephaly, hypertelorism, frontal bossing, odontogenic keratocysts of the jaws, calcification of the falx cerebri, and bifid ribs.
Diagnosis: Basal cell nevus syndrome with multiple basal cell carcinomas.
Impairment Rating: 55% impairment of the whole person; combine with estimated rating for signifi- cant emotional distress from Chapter 14, Mental and Behavorial Disorders (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604), to determine total impairment.
Comment: Basal cell nevus syndrome or Gorlin syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder with an estimated prevalence of 1 per 56,000. It
is characterized by multiple basal cell carcinomas, a range of other tumors, and widespread develop- mental defects.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-17
55% to 84% Impairment Due to Skin Disease

Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Right leg severely injured in crash; deep- vein thrombophlebitis required 6 months’ total or partial bed rest in hospital and at home. Right leg swelling increased despite elastic stocking. 4 days after resuming work, spilled can of caustic drain cleaner; second- and third-degree burns over 20% of right lower leg. Burn healed after 12 weeks; scar but no thickening or contracture.
Current Symptoms: Despite elastic support stock- ings and diuretics, intolerable leg edema. Unable to stay on feet for over 4 hours without significant swelling and discomfort. Periodic treatment, Unna’s paste boots; occasional hospital admis- sions heal ulcers temporarily. Difficulty sleeping; tolerates clothing over leg only 1 or 2 hours.
Hospitalized for sepsis and persistent cellulitis.
Physical Exam: Right leg pitting edema below knee. Hypopigmented, atrophic, hyperesthetic scar from midthigh to ankle and from thigh anterior midline to posterior midline. Stasis dermatitis with ulcera- tion. Altered perception of pain and touch; hyper- esthesia in scar area. A 4 x 5-cm ulcer with granulating base over right medial malleolus; sur- rounding skin erythema. Weight-bearing difficulty due to ulcer pain.
Clinical Studies: Ultrasound: chronic phlebitis, right leg.
Diagnosis: Postthrombophlebitis syndrome with sta- sis dermatitis and ulceration; scar formation sec- ondary to chemical burn.
Impairment Rating: 55% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Anticipate future episodes of phlebitis, cellulitis, and ulceration. Requires indefinite dili- gent medical care.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-18
55% to 84% Impairment Due to Pustular Psoriasis With Psoriatic Arthritis

Subject: 32-year-old man.
History: 2 months’ pretibial erythematous, scaly eruption; spread to upper extremities and hand. Pain, swelling, and erythema of knees; sterile urethral discharge. Condition improved only with systemic steroids and cytotoxic agents. Initial possible diagnoses: Reiter’s syndrome, kerato- derma blennorrhagica, or pustular psoriasis with psoriatic arthritis. Rehospitalized 3 months later with acute, severely exacerbated skin eruption; severe pain, swelling, and deformity of all extrem- ity joints. Oral methotrexate partially
controlled disease.
Current Symptoms: Periodic arthritis flare-ups and psoriasis require hospitalization. Exacerbations with generalized pustulation involve trunk, palms, and soles; difficult to care for himself, stand, sit, walk, and drive. Difficulty grasping and tactile discrimination at work; unable to have sexual intercourse.
Physical Exam: Widespread pustular eruption, acute conjunctivitis, and severe arthritis of all hand, wrist, knee, ankle, and toe joints. Hands and feet joints warm, red, and tender; minimal swelling.
Flexion deformities in both hands.
Clinical Studies: Radiographs: carpal bones, proxi- mal and distal heads of the metacarpals, and pha- langes, marked demineralization. Joint space narrowing and periosteal reactions in metacarpals. Biopsy: exudative psoriasis.
Diagnosis: Pustular psoriasis with psoriatic arthritis.
Impairment Rating: 60% impairment due to psoria- sis; combine with appropriate impairment esti- mates for limitations of joint motion and for any other involved organ system (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Reiter’s syndrome and pustular psoriasis clinical features may overlap, relapse, and adversely affect the ability to perform activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-19
55% to 84% Impairment Due to Thermal Burn Scarring and Dyspnea
Subject: 25-year-old man.
History: 3 years’ severe burns over 85% of total body surface area; smoke inhalation; some grafts.
Current Symptoms: Unable to work with heavy equipment. Skin fragile, dried, and cracked. Hot, dizzy, and unable to perspire in warm environ- ments. Marked difficulty with writing, walking, and nonspecific hand activities. Scar formation causes pain and decreased range of motion. Feels disfigured. Greatly limited ability to participate in group activities. No sexual relations after injury; short of breath with physical activity.
Physical Exam: Healed atrophic scars over 85% of body; minimally atrophic skin grafts and donor sites. Several depigmented areas, including some on cheeks and backs of hands. Partial destruction of left ear; distorted fingernails. Diminished range of motion of both hands.
Clinical Studies: Basic labs: normal.
Diagnosis: Extensive scarring due to thermal burns and dyspnea.
Impairment Rating: 60% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Combine the skin (burn) impairment with impairments due to musculoskeletal and pul- monary dysfunction (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment; adjust to consider any mental and behavioral impairment present.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-20
55% to 84% Impairment Due to Mycosis Fungoides


Subject: 56-year-old man.
History: 20 years’ progressive pruritic rash; pruritic patches on back and extremities. Topical therapy; eruption gradually generalized. Treated with topi- cal nitrogen mustard, PUVA, photophoresis, and electron beam therapy. Eruption uncontrolled with cytotoxic agent or radiation therapy.
Current Symptoms: Confined to home; unable to care for himself, walk, travel, grasp, or participate in sexual activity.
Physical Exam: Diffuse, erythematous, scaly plaques; some quite firm. Many trunk and extrem- ity excoriations; foul-smelling and draining nodu- lar tumors on face, palms, and soles. Palpable axillary and inguinal lymph nodes.
Clinical Studies: Biopsy: skin, lymph node positive for mycosis fungoides. Other labs: normal.
Diagnosis: Mycosis fungoides.
Impairment Rating: 75% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Tumor-stage, widespread mycosis fun- goides requires close medical surveillance.
Morbidity is considerable; poor prognosis. Interference with many activities of daily living; most individuals die within 2 to 5 years.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-21
85% to 95% Impairment Due to Xeroderma Pigmentosum
Subject: 18-year-old woman.
History: 13 years’ photophobia. At 5 years, marked pigmentation of sun-exposed areas of face, chest, arms, and legs. Since then, generalized freckling of skin, several areas of telangiectasia, and multi- ple basal and squamous cell epitheliomas.
Current Symptoms: Condition progressing in severity; continuous observation and treatment. Confined to home for past year.
Physical Exam: Showed all signs described above.
Clinical Studies: Basic lab findings: normal. Fecal, urinary porphyrin studies: negative.
Diagnosis: Xeroderma pigmentosum.
Impairment Rating: 85% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Xeroderma pigmentosum is a progres- sive disease; ultimate impairment approaches 100%, a fatal evolution. May develop metastatic carcinoma from squamous cell carcinomas or malignant melanoma.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 8-22
85% to 95% Impairment Due to Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica

Subject: 19-year-old man.
History: Bullous lesions shortly after birth; continu- ously since then, except for very minor and short remissions. Bullae appeared after slightest trauma; healed with severe scarring and milia.
Current Symptoms: Requires continuous hospital- ization.
Physical Exam: Fingers are tapered stumps (mitten deformities for hands). Constant bullae in mouth and pharynx; probably extended to epiglottis.
Weight 40% below desirable for height.
Clinical Studies: Roentgenography: esophageal stricture.
Diagnosis: Epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica.
Impairment Rating: 95% impairment due to epi- dermolysis bullosa dystrophica; combine with impairment estimates for esophagus stricture and fingers (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: This autosomal recessive disorder is one of the most impairing of all hereditary dis- eases; impairment approaches 100% and death. Increased risk of aggressive squamous cell carci- noma. Evaluate for any mental and behavioral impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

8.8 Skin Impairment
	Evalution Summary
See Table 8-3 for an evalution summary for the assessment of permanent impairment due to skin disorders.






================================================================================
Chapter 9: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
9.1 Principles of Assessment
9.2 Anemia
9.3 Polycythemia and Myelofibrosis
9.4 White Blood Cell Diseases or Abnormalities
9.5 Hemorrhagic and Platelet Disorders
9.6 Thrombotic Disorders
9.7 Hematologic Impairment Evaluation Summary	Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating perma- nent impairment of the hematopoietic system. The hematopoietic system, including the bone marrow, lymph nodes, and spleen, produces a heterogeneous population of blood-circulating cells (eg, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets) and a complex family of proteins critical for blood clotting and immune defenses. Cells from this system also pro- duce proteins that affect daily physiologic responses (eg, granulocyte, granulocyte-macrophage stimulat- ing factors, etc) and respond to many pathologic stimuli (eg, tumor necrosis factor and interleukins). Because the hematopoietic system supports other cells or organs of the body, identifiable defects are assigned impairment ratings only secondarily through altered function of other end organs. For example, very severe anemia can reduce oxygen delivery to the point where the individual suffers a myocardial infarction or stroke. Age and comorbid conditions further complicate the determination of impairment. Most of the products of the hematopoi- etic system also include remarkable compensatory biologic mechanisms.
191
Clinical alterations can be hereditary or acquired. Because of functional adaptation of the young, hereditary defects manifest in childhood are com- monly modest in degree of impairment. With age, alterations become more definitive and functional impairment more evident. Abnormalities can be quantitative—production of too many cells (ie, leukemia or polycythemia) or too few cells (ie, ane- mia or thrombocytopenia)—or they can be qualita- tive, with production of a defective protein (ie, factor V Leiden or prothrombin 20210A) resulting in an increased propensity for thrombosis.
This edition of the Guides has expanded sections on human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and throm- botic disorders.
9.1 Principles of Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for per- forming and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.
9.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs Some impairment classes refer to symptoms that limit the ability to perform daily activities. When this information is subjective and open to misinterpreta- tion, it should not serve as the sole criterion upon which decisions about impairment are made. Rather, the examiner should obtain objective data about the limitations’ extent and integrate those findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of perma- nent impairment.
Impairment percentages reflect severity of symp- toms, physical and laboratory findings, and estimated functional limitations resulting from hematologic abnormality. See Table 9-1 for the functional classifi- cations of hematologic system disease. The activities of daily living are listed in Table 1-2 and the Glossary.
9.1 b Description of Procedures
Aids to diagnose hematologic impairment vary depending on the suspected diagnosis. Common tests include a complete blood count, bone marrow aspira- tion and biopsy, hemoglobin electrophoresis, direct and indirect antiglobulin test and cold agglutinin assay, flow cytometry, cytogenetics of peripheral blood and/or bone marrow, immunochemical analy- sis of immunoglobulins, fat pad biopsy with Congo red stain, and hemostasis studies.
9.2  Anemia
The functional effects of chronic anemia depend on the degree of the cardiovascular system’s compensa- tory response. Regardless of the anemia’s pathogene- sis, impairment is related to the heart’s inability to deliver adequate oxygen to tissues. To compensate for the anemia, the heart increases cardiac output by acceleration of heart rate and also increases oxygen extraction from the tissues (ie, increases arteriove- nous difference). Therefore, a person with a mild anemia (hemoglobin level of about 10 g/dL) and a normal cardiovascular system receives a lower impairment rating than a person with underlying dys- function of the cardiovascular system.
Symptoms of anemia include shortness of breath on exertion, dizziness, throbbing headaches, and fatigue. The speed at which anemia develops at any hemoglobin level correlates to the complexity of symptoms. Greater degrees of anemia may be associ- ated with lack of stamina, fatigue on exertion, fatigue at rest, and dyspnea at rest. Thus, no specific concen- trations of hemoglobin determine impairment.
Anemia impairment is measured by the limitations of
The Hematopoietic System	193
cardiovascular response and may be lessened by a successful blood transfusion.
Many forms of anemia are reversible with specific therapy. Anemias resulting from decreased red cell production due to nutrient deficit (eg, iron-deficiency anemia, megaloblastic anemia secondary to folic acid,
of impairment is related to the anemia’s severity, need for transfusion, and impact on the ability to per- form activities of daily living. Additional organ sys- tem impairment due to anemia can be combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
The benefits of red blood cell transfusion normally
vitamin B
deficiency, etc) are correctable with spe-
last 6 to 8 weeks. In individuals with hemolytic ane-
cific nutrient therapy.
A permanent impairment may develop from sequelae of the anemia. In megaloblastic anemia due to B deficiency, significant neurologic deficit caused by dysmyelinization (particularly of the posterolateral spinal tracks) may occur and result in permanent neu- rologic impairment. Folic acid deficiency during preg- nancy may result in lifelong impairment of the newborn with varying degrees of neural tube defects. In some circumstances of hypoproliferative anemia from chronic renal failure, the anemia is correctable with exogenous erythropoietin even though the renal failure is irreversible. Similarly, many forms of ane- mia due to increased and, particularly, acquired red cell destruction (ie, hemolytic anemias) are reversible with therapy and therefore do not result in permanent impairment.
Persistent hemolytic anemia may cause a degree of impairment that is related to the anemia’s severity. This impairment consideration also applies to aplas- tic or refractory anemia caused by defective bone marrow function. Persistent refractory anemia may cause impairment regardless of the cause; the degree
mia caused by serum factors, and in some who have had many transfusions, the survival rate of transfused cells is shortened and transfusions must be repeated every 1 to 5 weeks. Impairment increases as hemoly- sis becomes more severe.
In congenital hemolytic anemias, particularly those related to altered hemoglobin synthesis (eg, hemo- globinopathies and thalassemias), tissue impairment beyond the hematopoietic system results in perma- nent impairment.1 Sickle cell diseases, especially sickle cell anemia, are commonly associated with severe, painful vaso-occlusive crisis that can result in functional impairment of varying degrees.2 These vascular occlusive lesions result in end-organ dam- age to the bones, heart, kidneys, and liver, com- pounding the degree of impairment.
9.2 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Anemia
The impairment criteria for anemia are given in Table 9-2.
*Level before transfusion.
†Implies hemolysis of transfused blood.
194	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-1
0% to 10% Impairment Due to Anemia
Subject: 18-year-old man.
History: Seen for medical clearance for regular physical education class.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Hemoglobin: 120 g/L (12.0 g/dL) with anisocytosis. Hemoglobin electrophoresis: hemoglobin sickle cell type AS.
Diagnosis: Sickle cell trait.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: No impairment in function currently exists or is anticipated during performance of rou- tine sports or daily activities. Ensure that adequate hydration occurs with physical exertion to prevent severe dehydration. The student should avoid pro- longed exposure to hypoxia.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-2
0% to 10% Impairment Due to Anemia With Rheumatoid Arthritis
Subject: 48-year-old woman.
History: More than 10-year history of rheumatoid arthritis, managed with acetylsalicylic acid, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and intermittent corticosteroids.
Current Symptoms: Occasional fatigue, stiffness in hands, and difficulty performing activities of daily living.
Physical Exam: Joint deformities in both hands con- sistent with rheumatoid arthritis.
Clinical Studies: Hemoglobin: 102 g/L (10.2 g/dL). Hematocrit: 0.31 Proportion of 1.0 (31%). Mean corpuscular volume: 79. Serum ferritin: 110µg/L (110 ng/mL). Remainder of labs normal except for rheumatoid factor.
Diagnosis: Anemia with rheumatoid arthritis.
Impairment Rating: 5% to 10% impairment of the whole person due to anemia; combine with an impairment rating for the rheumatoid arthritis.
Comment: Unlike the rheumatoid arthritis, the anemia is mild. Some people with rheumatoid arthritis or chronic inflammatory lesions develop iron-deficiency anemia due to medication and gastrointestinal blood loss. This woman’s normal serum ferritin rules this out. Her anemia is that seen in the anemia of chronic disease.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-3
11% to 30% Impairment Due to Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia
Subject: 59-year-old man.
History: Found to be anemic 2 years after a lung infection.
Current Symptoms: Fatigue; takes naps several days per week; doesn’t do vigorous work such as shoveling snow or prolonged yard work.
Physical Exam: Normal; no palpable liver or spleen.
Clinical Studies: Hemoglobin: 95 g/L (9.5 g/dL).
Hematocrit: 0.29 Proportion of 1.0 (29%). Serologic evidence of cold agglutinins. Low- grade hemolysis with “laking” on peripheral smear; elevated mean corpuscular volume, which decreased on warming; cold agglutinin, chronic hemolytic disease.
Diagnosis: Autoimmune hemolytic anemia of the cold antibody type.
The Hematopoietic System	195
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Chronicity is established; there is no spe- cific therapy. Anemia limits performance of daily activities. Exposure to colds or viral illnesses car- ries a risk of abrupt, enhanced red cell destruction with a further anemia. Some individuals, particu- larly in older age groups, may develop a malig- nant lymphoma of the large cell type. Regular follow-up is recommended.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-4
11% to 30% Impairment Due to Sickle Cell Anemia
Subject: 22-year-old woman.
History: Sickle cell anemia since 2 years old.
Repeated pain crisis. Hemoglobin 85-95 g/L (8.5- 9.5 g/dL) for the last 5 years, without adequate response to hydroxyurea. Pain crises occur four to six times per year. Performance of daily activities limited since vigorous physical work can provoke a pain crisis.
Current Symptoms: Slight fatigue; takes naps when not having a pain crisis. Usually off work several times per year for several days per occurrence due to pain crisis episodes.
Physical Exam: Sickle cell habitus.
Clinical Studies: Hemoglobin: 82 g/L (8.2 g/dL). White blood cell count: 12.0 ? 109/L (12,000 ? 103/µL). Hemoglobin electrophoresis review: con- firms sickle cell hemoglobin (SS) with normal fetal and A hemoglobin.
Diagnosis: Sickle cell anemia.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Decreased risk of other, potential seque- lae—avascular necrosis of the femoral heads, car- diomyopathy, renal failure, etc—requires careful monitoring. Transfusions provide transient sup- port and are mainly used for crisis intervention.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-5
31% to 70% Impairment Due to Chronic Anemia With Myelodysplastic Syndrome
Subject: 48-year-old woman.
History: Fatigue, decreased appetite, and limited energy 1 year ago led to recognition of a progres- sive anemia. Erythropoietin has not increased red cell values. Requires transfusions of 1 to 3 U of packed red blood cells every 4 to 5 weeks.
Current Symptoms: Fatigue; decreased energy; needs to rest and take an afternoon nap daily. Can perform light activities of daily living with help. Feels better for 7 to 10 days after transfusions, and then declines in function.
Physical Exam: Signs of anemia; otherwise normal.
Clinical Studies: Bone marrow: myelodysplasia with excess blasts. Hemoglobin: 70 g/L (7.0 g/dL).
Diagnosis: Chronic anemia with myelodysplastic syndrome.
Impairment Rating: 65% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Condition is likely to progress in terms of the severity of the anemia, with an increase in the frequency of transfusions required since isoimmunization is an inevitable sequela.
Individual is at increased risk of transformation to acute leukemia and hemochromatosis due to transfusion requirements.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-6
31% to 70% Impairment Due to Aplastic Anemia
Subject: 32-year-old woman.
History: Severe aplastic anemia diagnosed 4 years ago. Failed immunosuppressive agents and bone marrow transplantation. Now requires 3 U packed red cells every 4 weeks.
196	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
Current Symptoms: Fatigue, especially before transfusions. Very limited exercise tolerance: able to walk for only 5 to 10 minutes before fatigue and shortness of breath occur.
Physical Exam: Signs of anemia.
Clinical Studies: Hemoglobin: 70 g/L (7 g/dL).
Diagnosis: Aplastic anemia.
Impairment Rating: 60% to 69% impairment of the whole person.
Comments: Chronic, severe anemia with continued, significant transfusion needs; ongoing risks of hemochromatosis and comorbid problems likely.3
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-7
71% to 100% Impairment Due to Anemia
Subject: 36-year-old woman.
History: 2-year history of cerebrovascular accident, with a severe anemia associated with hemolysis and iron deficiency. Developed Budd-Chiari syn- drome 4 months ago.
Current Symptoms: Weakness and fatigue; pale skin.
Physical Exam: Pallor; residual left-sided weakness.
Pulse: 100 BPM.
Clinical Studies: Hemoglobin: 65 g/L (6.5 g/dL).
White blood cell count: 2.5 ? 109/L (2500 ?
103/µL). Platelets: 80 ? 109/L (80 ? 103/µL).
Diagnosis: Severe hemolytic anemia, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, and Budd-Chiari syn- drome.
Impairment Rating: 90%+ impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Limited treatment, given the recent Budd-Chiari syndrome.
9.3
Polycythemia and
Myelofibrosis
Polycythemia vera is manifested by hematocrit val- ues above 0.52 Proportion of 1.0 (52%) in men and
0.49 Proportion of 1.0 (49%) in women, and by red blood cell volumes above 0.036 L/kg (36 mL/kg) in men and 0.032 L/kg (32 mL/kg) in women. Other frequent symptoms are normal arterial oxygen ten- sion, an enlarged spleen, slight elevation of the white blood cell and platelet counts, and increased leuko- cyte alkaline phosphatase. An increase in red cell numbers (polycythemia) can be due to cardiopul- monary disease, smoking, or inappropriate secretion of erythropoietin. If the primary cause of poly- cythemia can be treated and the polycythemia is cor- rected, there should be no permanent impairment. Phlebotomy to normal hematocrit levels should cor- rect the symptoms of all forms of polycythemia. Polycythemia can lead to other organ system impair- ments, such as cerebrovascular or cardiovascular occlusions.
Myelofibrosis (bone marrow fibrosis) may also occur in individuals with polycythemia. While some indi- viduals remain relatively asymptomatic for several years, others experience fatigue, weakness, weight loss, perspiration, and low-grade fever, and develop a large spleen. Currently, no therapy exists to relieve the symptoms of myelofibrosis. Transfusions may be needed for severe anemia. Exogenous erythropoietin increases red cell production in some people.
9.3 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Polycythemia and/or Myelofibrosis
Polycythemia can produce end-organ damage to car- diovascular or cerebrovascular areas due to vascular occlusion. Vascular obstruction of the postal venous system similarly can produce end-organ injury to the liver. The impairment rating is based on the end organ involved, degree of injury, and impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living.
The Hematopoietic System	197
The criteria for diagnosis of myelofibrosis, of pri- mary (idiopathic) or secondary (postpolycythemic) etiology, include progressive anemia with red cell changes of anisocytosis and poikilocytosis, a shift to the left of the granulocytic white cell series, and, often, nucleated red blood cells in the peripheral blood. Bone marrow indicates fibrosis with dilated sinusoids and clustering of megakaryocytes. The degree of impairment due to myelofibrosis is reflected by the degree of impairment due to the ane- mia. Examples are provided in the impairment sec- tion on anemia (also see Table 9-2).
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-8
31% to 70% Impairment Due to Primary Myelofibrosis
Subject: 55-year-old woman.
History: 2-year history of progressive fatigue, abdominal fullness, early satiety, and a 4.5-kg (10-lb) weight loss in the past 6 months.
Current Symptoms: Weakness; night sweats; tender, full feeling in abdomen.
Physical Exam: Evidence of protein wasting. Spleen 8 cm beneath left costal margin.
Clinical Studies: Hemoglobin: 80 g/L (8.0 g/dL). Hematocrit: 0.24 Proportion of 1.0 (24%). White blood cell count: 12.0 ? 109/L (12,000 103/µL) with shift to left of granulocytes, nucleated red blood cells, and abnormal platelets. Platelet count: 450 ? 109/L (450 ? 103/µL). Uric acid: 0.54 µmol/L (9.0 mg/dL). Bone marrow: dry aspirate.
Myelofibrosis on section.
Diagnosis: Primary myelofibrosis (agnogenic myeloid metaplasia).
Impairment Rating: 50% to 60% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Clinical symptoms and limitations in function parallel the degree of anemia; the pres- ence of symptomatic splenomegaly and the irre- versibility of this condition warrant a higher impairment rating.
9.4 White Blood Cell Diseases or
Abnormalities
The primary function of white blood cells (leukocytes) is providing protection against invading microorgan- isms, foreign proteins, and other materials. Three sep- arate white blood cell “families”—granulocytes, lymphocytes, and monocytes-macrophages—interact to provide this protection. Each white blood cell fam- ily has a fixed tissue component that provides the renewal or precursor pool and also functions at fixed sites, including the bone marrow, spleen, and lymph nodes. Abnormalities in white blood cells are expressed as both numbers and alterations in function.
9.4 a Granulocytes
Granulocytes protect against infection through the phagocytosis of invading organisms. They function primarily at the site of tissue invasion; the observa- tion or enumeration of granulocytes in the circulation indicates inflammation or infection. Granulocytes have a brief half-life of approximately 6 hours. The granulocyte precursor pool is in the bone marrow, where a very large production capacity exists.
Abnormal granulocyte function is usually congenital, although acquired functional abnormalities may result from drug use or toxin exposure. Frequent infection is an indicator of defective granulocyte function; infec- tion may vary from localized, self-limited infections such as furunculosis to life-threatening infections such as recurring septicemia. Type, frequency, and severity of the recurring infections are the basis for evaluating impairment. An affected individual will have a reason- ably consistent infection pattern that facilitates treat- ment and enables a judgment concerning prognosis.
Two different forms of quantitative granulocyte abnormalities are granulocytopenia and leukemia. Granulocytopenia is characterized by a significant decrease in the total number of granulocytes in the blood. Significant infections due to low numbers are uncommon, unless the granulocyte count is less than
0.50 ? 109/L. Irreversible chronic neutropenia with counts below 0.50 ? 109/L is associated with a sub- stantially increased risk of infection; the infection defines impairment.
198	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
Two types of leukemia, acute granulocytic leukemia and chronic granulocytic leukemia, result in impaired function of the individual and limited life expectancy, even with currently available therapy. Impairment is based on symptoms, physical findings, requirement for and frequency of therapy, and the ability to carry out activities of daily living.
9.4 b Lymphocytes
Lymphocytes provide humoral and cellular defense mechanisms. Circulating lymphocytes originate in lymphoid tissues: the bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes, and thymus. Lymphocytes circulate between the blood and the tissues. Lymphocyte cells have heterogeneous functions.
Of the two major subgroups, the “T,” or thymus- derived, lymphocytes are primarily responsible for cellular immunity and are involved in delayed hyper- sensitivity reactions and transplant rejection. The “B,” or bursa-derived, lymphocytes are primarily responsible for humoral immunity related to the pro- duction of immunoglobulins and biologically active kinins. Subtypes of both T and B lymphoctyes have distinct functions and abnormalities that produce dis- tinct clinical syndromes.
Lymphocytes can be abnormal in function and/or number, often leading to recurrent infections.
Individuals with Hodgkin’s disease or connective tissue diseases and those who have been exposed to ionizing radiation all have acquired functional defects. Some “autoimmune” diseases may be a result of functionally altered or numerically predom- inant subsets of lymphocytes. Impairment ratings due to abnormal numbers of lymphocytes, as with lymphopenia, are based on the severity of the condi- tion, as indicated by recurrent infection, and a lim- ited ability to perform activities of daily living.
The best documentation of defective lymphocyte function or numbers is to determine failure of end functions like generalized immunoglobulin defi- ciency or delayed hypersensitivity reaction failure. Lymphocyte abnormalities are associated with three forms of neoplastic transformation: (1) leukemias (including chronic lymphatic leukemia, chronic myelogenous leukemia, acute lymphatic leukemia, and hairy cell leukemia)4; (2) lymphomas (including Hodgkin’s disease, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and mycosis fungoides); and (3) multiple myeloma and macroglobulinemia.
Chronic lymphatic leukemia, hairy cell leukemia, and some low-grade lymphomas may be relatively indolent, require no initial therapy unless severe and irreversible, and constitute no impairment for several years. Similarly, multiple myeloma and macroglo bulinemia may be asymptomatic initially, manifested only by certain laboratory abnormalities, and consti-
tute no impairment. However, some individuals have a high level of impairment because of recurrent GI tract bleeding. Impairment may be related to developing anemia, the need for chemotherapy or radiation to enlarging lymph nodes, or, in the case of multiple myeloma, bone pain. See Chapters 6, The Digestive System; 16, The Upper Extremities; 17, The Lower Extremities; and 18, Pain, for more information about intestinal bleeding and bone pain.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection creates a progressive and ultimately fatal disease process with a complex course and widely variable degrees of functional impairment. HIV can directly destroy CD4T lymphocytes, resulting in impairment of the normal immune response against infection and neoplastic processes. The risk of developing oppor- tunistic infection is, in general, inversely related to the absolute CD4 count.5, 6
HIV infection impairment is caused by single- or multiple-organ system involvement from primary HIV infection or the opportunistic infection or neo- plastic process from immunologic dysfunction.
Essentially, every organ system can be affected, including hematologic, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, neurologic, dermatologic, and renal. Several systems are often simultaneously affected, adding to the com- plexity of impairment determination.
Acute retroviral syndrome may develop early in HIV infection; symptoms include fever, fatigue, pharyngi- tis, rash, myalgia, and arthralgia. Quantitative HIV RNA measurements also indicate the extent of
HIV infection. Early stages are characterized by a CD4 count greater than 0.50 ? 109/L (500 cells/mm3); individuals are often asymptomatic but may have lymphadenopathy, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and dermatologic conditions. Intermediate stages have CD4 counts of 0.20 ? 109/L to 0.50 ? 109/L (200-500 cells/mm3); antiretroviral therapy is often initiated to prolong this stage of disease. Individuals may have few or no symptoms or may develop con- stitutional symptoms, diarrhea, herpes simplex infec- tion, oral or vaginal candidiasis, upper respiratory tract infection, sinusitis, or common bacterial infec- tion. Advanced stages, often defined by CD4 counts less than 0.20 ? 109/L (200 cells/mm3), are associated
with an increased incidence of opportunistic infection
The Hematopoietic System	199
and meet the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) definition for acquired immunode- ficiency syndrome (AIDS). At low CD4 level, there is increased incidence of complications, including Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP); Toxoplasma gondii encephalitis; tuberculosis; cryptosporidiosis salmonellosis; esophageal candidiasis; neoplasms including Kaposi’s sarcoma, lymphoma, and cervical cancer; and neurologic dysfunction, such as mononeuritis multiplex, peripheral neuropathies, cra- nial nerve palsies, and myelitis. At CD4 levels below
0.10 ? 109/L (100 cells mm3), the following are more common: HIV-associated dementia, wasting syn- dromes, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis, disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC), cryptococcal meningitis, disseminated coccidiomycosis, histoplas- mosis, and invasive aspergillosis.
The degree of symptomatic involvement and the course of illness in individuals with the same CD4 cell-defined stages varies significantly. Functional impairment can also develop from toxicity responses to antiretroviral treatments, including reverse transcriptase inhibitors; viral protease enzyme inhibitors; and antibacterial, antiviral, antifungal, and antineoplastic therapy. Determine total impairment only after careful assessment of each of the potentially affected organ systems. Also consider the nature and severity of the primary or secondary infections or neoplastic processes. If several organ systems are involved in the HIV infection process, the whole person impairment percentages related to the involved systems are combined using the Combined Values Chart (see p. 604).
9.4 c Monocytes-Macrophages
The monocyte-macrophage family ingests foreign proteins, removes cellular debris, particulates material, and modulates immune responses. This functional unit of circulating monocytes and fixed macrophages, “histiocytes,” is structurally associated with endothelial cells and fibroblasts in the reticuloendothelial system. This system is recognized primarily by the phagocytic capacity of monocytes and macrophages.
Knowledge about functional defects in the monocyte-macrophage system is limited. The degree of impairment can be associated with the nature, type, and extent of infection. Lipid storage disease is another abnormality in which macrophages become repositories for lipids, and cellular and organ hyperplasia occurs in the spleen, lymph nodes, and
bone marrow. Marrow involvement can produce progressive and massive bone abnormalities and fractures; impairment focuses on the degree of orthopedic deficit.
Neurologic involvement also occurs in some severe forms of lipid storage disease. Enzyme replacement therapy is now available for Gaucher disease, one of the most common types of lipid storage disease.
This therapy is incredibly effective at reversing most abnormalities except for neurologic deficit. Impairment depends on the nature of the lipid, rate of deposition, and primarily affected organs.
Neoplastic transformation occurs primarily as acute monocytic leukemia, a relatively rare form of leukemia. Leukemic reticuloendotheliosis is a more chronic variant. The exact cell of origin is not clear, but the condition behaves as a form of chronic neoplastic transformation.
9.4d The Spleen and Splenectomy
A normal spleen cleanses the blood of bacteria and other foreign matter. Splenectomy removes a quarter of the total lymphoid tissue and the major mass of macrophages. As a consequence of splenectomy, some functional abnormalities may develop. These include impaired clearance of certain encapsulated bacteria, such as the pneumococcus. Occasionally, individuals develop overwhelming infections after splenectomy. This occurs in fewer than 2% of people from whom the organ has been removed and is confined mostly to the first 2 years after the operation. The incidence is greatly reduced by prophylactic administration of the polyvalent pneumococcal vaccine. Splenectomy leads to some subtle, albeit clinically silent, morphologic abnor- malities of red blood cells and a slight elevation of the platelet count. Splenectomized individuals are not at an increased risk for viral or other infections from nonencapsulated bacteria.
9.4 e Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to White Blood Cell Disease
The impairment criteria for white blood cell disease are given in Table 9-3.
200	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-9
0% to 15% Impairment Due to White Blood Cell Disease
Subject: 21-year-old man.
History: Ruptured spleen in automobile accident. Splenectomy; uneventful postoperative course. Returned to all daily activities in 2 months.
Evaluation 8 months after hospital discharge.
Current Symptoms: None.
Physical Exam: Left upper quadrant well-healed scar; otherwise, exam normal.
Clinical Studies: Elevated white blood cell count: 10.0-18.0 ? 109/L (10,000-18,000 ? 103/µL),
Diagnosis: Status postsplenectomy for splenic rupture.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Postsplenectomy blood changes are not associated with symptoms or any change in the ability to perform activities of daily living. A slight increase in the risk of systemic infection for selected organisms does exist. If the individual experiences repeat infections, the impairment rat- ing should be reevaluated.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-10
0% to 15% Impairment Due to HIV Infection
Subject: 30-year-old man.
History: Tested for HIV infection because of sexual contact with individual with risk factors for HIV.
Current Symptoms: None.
Physical Exam: Generalized lymphadenopathy.
Clinical Studies: HIV enzyme immunoassay: posi- tive. Western blot: positive. HIV RNA: 5000 copies/mL of plasma. CD4: 0.70 ? 109/L (700/mm3).
Diagnosis: Asymptomatic HIV infection.
Impairment Rating: 5% to 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Treatment of an asymptomatic HIV- infected individual with a low viral load and high CD4 count is controversial. Current guidelines suggest withholding therapy.
The Hematopoietic System	201
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-11
16% to 30% Impairment Due to Chronic Granulocytic Leukemia
Subject: 40-year-old man.
History: Pain, tightness in left upper abdominal quadrant. Leukocytes 150.0 ? 109/L.
Current Symptoms: None. In remission for 6 months.
Physical Exam: 3.6-kg (8-lb) weight loss.
Splenomegaly; spleen extended 12 cm below left costal margin. Posttreatment, spleen extended 4 cm below costal margin.
Clinical Studies: Leukocytes: 150.0 ? 109/L
(150.0 ? 103/µL); many myelocytes and progran- ulocytes.
Diagnosis: Chronic granulocytic leukemia.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Remission with daily medication; periodic dosage adjustment.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-12
16% to 30% Impairment Due to HIV Infection
Subject: 30-year-old man.
History: Known to be HIV infected.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic; dismayed about condition and medication regimen; feels well generally.
Physical Exam: Diffuse lymphadenopathy.
Clinical Studies: CD4: 0.35 ? 109/L (350/mm3).
HIV RNA: 45,000 copies/mL of plasma.
Diagnosis: Asymptomatic, moderately advanced HIV infection.
Impairment Rating: 16% to 30% of the whole person.
Comment: All authorities agree that an individual with CD4 cell counts and viral load in these ranges should receive antiretroviral therapy.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-13
31% to 55% Impairment Due to White Blood Cell Disease
Subject: 55-year-old woman.
History: Progressive weakness, easily fatigued, dys- pnea on exertion for 6 months.
Current Symptoms: Decreased appetite; sleeps often.
Physical Exam: Pallor, lymphadenopathy, and an enlarged spleen.
Clinical Studies: Hemoglobin: 700 g/L (7.0 g/dL); hematocit: 0.21 Proportion of 1.0 (21%); leuko-
cytes: 82.0 ? 109/L (82.0 ? 103/µL); with 0.96
Proportion of 1.00 (96%) lymphocytes: reticulo- cytes: 0.130 proportion of red blood cells (13% of red blood cells). Positive direct antiglobulin (Coombs’) test.
Diagnosis: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia with autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
Impairment Rating: 40% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Anemia and some of the related symp- toms will respond to steroid therapy. The underly- ing leukemia can generally be controlled with chemotherapy for 3 to 7 years.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-14
31% to 55% Impairment Due to Hodgkin’s Disease
Subject: 28-year-old man.
History: Initial response to ionizing radiation.
Pruritus, chills, and fever.
Current Symptoms: Profound weakness due to ane- mia that temporarily responded to drug treatment and transfusions.
Physical Exam: Lymphadenopathy below and above diaphragm.
Clinical Studies: Lymph nodes biopsy: showed Hodgkin’s disease.
Diagnosis: Recurrent, active Hodgkin’s disease.
202	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
Impairment Rating: 50% impairment due to advanced Hodgkin’s disease.
Comment: Combine with appropriate impairment percentage for anemia (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) for whole person impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-15
31% to 55% Impairment Due to Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
Subject: 30-year-old man.
History: Known to be HIV infected. Has consis- tently refused to take antiretroviral therapy.
Current Symptoms: Complains of weight loss, inter- mittent temperature elevation, and night sweats.
Physical Exam: Thrush; generalized lymphadenopathy.
Clinical Studies: CD4: 0.11 ? 109/L (110/mm3).
HIV RNA: 146,000 copies/mL of plasma.
Diagnosis: Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
Impairment Rating: 31% to 50% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Individual should be urged to begin highly active antiretroviral therapy. In addition, prophylaxis to prevent Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia should be initiated.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-16
56% to 100% Impairment Due to Acute Leukemia
Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Profound weakness, chills, night sweats, and fever for 10 months.
Current Symptoms: Relatively stable 6 months later.
Physical Exam: Gingival hypertrophy, nosebleeds. Splenomegaly; spleen extended 4 cm below costal margin; ecchymoses.
Clinical Studies: Hematologic values: hemoglobin 400 g/L (40 g/dL); white blood cell count: 12.0 ? 109/L (12,000 ? 103/µL), 80% blast forms; platelets: 18.0 ? 109/L (18.0 ? 103/µL).
Diagnosis: Acute leukemia.
Impairment Rating: 90% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Partial response to treatment. Continuous observation, frequent blood transfusions, and con- tinuing assistance with daily activities required.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-17
56% to 100% Impairment Due to Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
Subject: 30-year-old man.
History: Has received multiple combinations of anti- retroviral therapy over preceding 4 years.
Current Symptoms: Has diarrhea, anorexia, nausea, and persistent oral thrush; very weak.
Physical Exam: Has lost more than 10% of normal body weight; oral thrush; lymphadenopathy.
Clinical Studies: CD4: 0.02 ? 109/L (20/mm3). HIV RNA: 1,200,000 copies/mL of plasma.
Diagnosis: Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
Impairment Rating: 90% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Individual has far advanced HIV/AIDS, having failed currently available antiretroviral therapy. Emphasis should be placed upon main- taining prophylaxis against complicating infec- tions. Consideration should be given to entering into a palliative care program for management of terminal illness.
The Hematopoietic System	203
9.5 Hemorrhagic and
Platelet Disorders
Hemorrhagic disorders include coagulation disorders and platelet disease. Thrombocytopenia is not rated for impairment unless it is severe, affects function, and is irreversible by steroids, splenectomy, or other therapeutic regimens. Qualitative platelet defects rarely meet criteria for impairment rating unless there is serious bleeding, which also may occur in some rare congenital disorders. Von Willebrand’s disease is frequently mild; bleeding occurs only after trauma or surgery. It does not affect function signifi- cantly enough to warrant an impairment rating.
However, some individuals meet criteria for signifi- cant impairment rating because of recurrent GI tract bleeding.7-10
Hemorrhagic disorders are either congenital or acquired. In most hereditary disorders, the basic hemostatic defect remains unchanged throughout the individual’s life. People with hereditary blood coagu- lation disorders may require prophylactic therapy to help them perform activities they might otherwise avoid because of the threat of trauma. To control bleeding many may require frequent home treatment, which interferes with daily activity. Impairment rat- ings vary depending on the frequency of treatment, and the extent of interference with normal activity. (see Table 9-4).
Inherited bleeding disorders may cause complica- tions such as joint dysfunction from recurrent hemor- rhaging. Impairment due to this complication is evaluated with criteria found in Chapter 16, The Upper Extremities, and Chapter 17, The Lower Extremities. If several organ systems are impaired, the whole person impairment percents are combined (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Autoimmune thrombocytopenia may require long- term immunosuppressives, which can lead to dys- function of several organ systems and can hamper daily activity. Complications are evaluated according to the criteria of the affected body system or organ and combined with the impairment percentage for the appropriate blood platelet disorder (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Acquired blood-clotting defects are usually secondary to severe underlying conditions, such as chronic liver disease. Individuals with venous or arterial throm- boembolic disease who receive anticoagulant therapy with a vitamin K antagonist (eg, warfarin sodium) should avoid activities that might lead to trauma.
Impairment of the whole person with acquired blood- clotting defects is estimated at 0% to 10%.
9.5 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Hemorrhagic and Platelet Disorders
The impairment criteria for hemorrhagic and platelet disorders are given in Table 9-4.
204	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-18
0% to 15% Impairment Due to Platelet Disorders
Subject: 49-year-old woman.
History: 5 years’ chronic idiopathic autoimmune thrombocytopenia. Splenectomy; corticosteroids and other immunosuppressive drugs for 4 years.
Current Symptoms: No medication. No significant bleeding problem. Chronic low-back pain, which interferes with daily activities.
Physical Exam: Minor bruising. Severe osteoporosis; T12 and L1 compression fractures.
Clinical Studies: Platelets: 30.0 ? 109/L (30.0 ? 103/µL).
Diagnosis: Chronic idiopathic autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment for the underly- ing bleeding disorder. Combine with appropriate impairment estimate for vertebral fractures and osteoporosis (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Current platelet counts are not associated with symptoms. However, she has a slight increased risk of bleeding with surgical procedures. The thrombocytopenia may worsen intermittently (especially with infections) and may require periodic therapeutic intervention.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-19
16% to 30% Impairment Due to Platelet Disorders
Subject: 18-year-old woman.
History: Lifelong history of low platelets, congeni- tal; requires one to two platelet transfusions per month; on prednisone last several years to reduce transfusion need. Does not participate in vigorous sports for fear of further bruising.
Current Symptoms: Bruises easily; multiple ecchy- moses on extremities. Heavy and prolonged men- strual periods.
Physical Exam: Ecchymoses on extremities.
Abnormal radii bilaterally; good hand function.
Clinical Studies: Platelets: 8.0 ? 109/L (8.0 ? 103/µL).
Diagnosis: Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenic pur- pura with absent radii syndrome.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Requirements for prednisone; limitations in performance of vigorous daily activities. Likely future problems as she will probably become resistant to the platelet transfusions.
The Hematopoietic System	205
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-20
31% to 55% Impairment Due to Platelet Disorders
Subject: 21-year-old man.
History: Severe factor VIII deficiency (hemophilia A). Frequent spontaneous bleeding into large joints and muscles. Home therapy with intra- venous factor VIII concentrate two times per week. Significant chronic dysfunction of left knee, right ankle, and both elbows due to past joint bleeding.
Current Symptoms: Frequent joint, muscle hemor- rhages; continuous treatment interferes with per- formance of usual daily activities.
Physical Exam: Severely restricted range of motion in left knee, right ankle, and both elbows. Joint swelling of knee and ankle.
Clinical Studies: Hemoglobin: 120 g/L (12.0 g/dL). Factor VIII level: 0.001 Proportion of 1.0 (1%); antibodies to factor VIII: not present. aPTT: 120 seconds. X-rays of joints reveal fluid and hyper- trophic changes. HIV negative.
Diagnosis: Severe hemophilia A with permanent joint dysfunction secondary to recurrent bleeding.
Impairment Rating: 40% impairment for underly- ing bleeding disorder; combine with joint impair- ment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) for whole person impairment.
Comment: Control of bleeding episodes with factor VIII replacement will decrease subsequent bony changes. Joint replacement surgery can improve function in specific sites of impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-21
56% to 95% Impairment Due to Hemorrhagic Disorders
Subject: 58-year-old man.
History: Gastrointestinal bleeding 30 years ago; endoscopy indicated hemorrhagic telangiectasia through the stomach and small intestine. Requires 2 to 6 U packed red blood cells per month; receives IV iron at least once per week.
Current Symptoms: Weakness and fatigue. Black, tarry stools almost daily. Two to three nosebleeds per week.
Physical Exam: Telangiectasias of lips, nasal, and oral mucosa, some of which are friable. Similar but few lesions on the upper trunk.
Clinical Studies: Hemoglobin: 80 g/L (8 g/dL), raised to 100 g/L (10 g/dL) after 3 U of packed red blood cells. Serum iron: 2.1 µmol/L (12 µg/dL), with iron-binding capacity of 75.2 µmol/L (420 µg/dL). Serum ferritin: 5 µg/L (5 ng/mL).
Diagnosis: Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-Weber-Rondu syndrome) with severe iron deficiency.
Impairment Rating: 75% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Significant changes in lifestyle and poor prognosis warrant this impairment rating.
206	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
9.5 b Myelodysplastic Syndromes Myelodysplasia of hematopoietic precursors is more frequently recognized after age 50. It occurs as a pri- mary (idiopathic) or secondary form, commonly after exposure to a wide variety of industrial chemi- cals or after cytoreductive chemotherapy or radiation therapy for neoplastic disease. Causative factors include several drugs, particularly topoisomerase inhibitors and platinum derivatives. The principal primary or secondary hematopoietic changes are defective and decreased cellular proliferation and production. Cell line (red cells, white cells, and platelets) involvement and progression are variable. (For more information, refer to Tables 9-2, 9-3, and 9-4 for rating impairment due to anemia, granulocy- topenia, and thrombocytopenia.) Eventually, all cell lines become involved; at least one third of patients progress to a leukemic transformation. For unknown reasons, myelodysplasia sufferers have more consti- tutional symptoms than expected for peripheral hematologic value levels. Because of its long stable period, myelodysplasia impairment evaluation is combined with the degree of individual component alteration.
9.6 Thrombotic
Disorders
Thrombotic disorders involve arteries, veins, or both. Thrombosis may be either primary due to inherited disorder or secondary due to acquired conditions.
While each risk factor may contribute to thrombosis, combined factors may lead to a greater risk.11
9.6 a Inherited Thrombotic Disorders
Known defects include: proteins C, S, and antithrom- bin III deficiency; defective protein due to mutation associated with venous thrombosis (eg, factor V Leiden and prothrombin 20210A); and increased homocysteine levels due to cystathionine B-synthase deficiency (hyperhomocysteinemia can cause athero- sclerosis and thrombosis of the arteries and some- times of the veins). Seventy percent of individuals with thrombosis have one or more of the above abnormalities; the most common is factor V Leiden mutation.
Clinical indications of congenital thrombotic abnor- mality include: family history; occurrence at an early age; recurrence; and occurrence at unusual sites (eg, mesenteric, portal, splenic, renal, cerebral, or retinal veins).
9.6 b Acquired Thrombotic Disorders Acquired thrombotic conditions associated with venous thrombosis include: antiphospholipid anti- body syndrome (found in some arterial thrombosis, particularly stroke, patients), malignancy, drugs (oral contraceptives), immobility, postoperative phase, multiple trauma, and pregnancy. The acute phase of venous thrombosis is usually treated with heparin, then oral anticoagulation for 3 to 6 months.
Individuals with a greater risk of thrombosis require temporary (postsurgery) to lifelong (prophylaxis for inherited thrombotic disorder and recurrent thrombo- sis) anticoagulation therapy. Hyperhomocysteinemia can be controlled with high doses of folates; arterial thrombosis is treated according to the system involved.
Thrombotic disorder impairment results from sys- tematic complications following thrombosis and anticoagulation regimen. It depends on the type, site, and extent of the organ involvement, as well as the response and complications of anticoagulation.
Arterial thrombi may produce ischemic heart dis- ease, stroke, or intermittent claudication. Venous thrombosis usually resolves with no aftereffects. If unresolved, postthrombosis syndrome may develop due to vein lumen narrowing and/or venous valve insufficiency, causing lower extremity edema, venous ulceration, venous thrombosis recurrence, and ambulation limitation.
9.6c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Thrombotic Disorders Impairment is evaluated according to the affected body system. The impairment rating for a thrombotic disorder is based upon the degree of injury to the end organ, such as the lungs, heart, brain, kidney, extremities, etc, and upon how the disorder affects the individual’s capacity to perform activities of daily living. For example, a thrombotic disorder causing a stroke would be rated based on the effects of the stroke, as outlined in the nervous system. Long-term anticoagulation with warfarin or low-molecular-weight heparin increases bleeding risk and constitutes impairment in the 10% range. If there is an impairment rating of several organ systems, whole person impairment ratings for each affected system are combined (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 9-22
Impairment Due to Thrombotic Disorder
Subject: 49-year-old woman.
History: At 40 years of age, five left leg deep vein thromboses; two pulmonary embolisms. Father, brother had multiple venous thromboses. Lifelong Coumadin therapy. Five years’ oral anticoagulation. Two hemorrhagic episodes: posttrauma knee hematoma, thigh hematoma; international normal- ized ratio between 5 and 7. Large hemorrhagic skin necrosis twice when international normalized ratio at 4.
Current Symptoms: Left leg postthrombotic syn- drome; severe edema with upright position for over 30 minutes. Frequent thrombotic episodes, therapy-induced hemorrhages, and anticoagula- tion monitoring interfere with work. Lower extremity swelling requires intermittent wheel- chair use.
Physical Exam: Edema of left leg to mid-thigh, which increases when in upright position; ecchymosis (and resolving ecchymosis) of arms and legs.
Clinical Studies: Platelet count and aPTT: normal.
INR: 2.8. Protein C antigen: 62% of normal.
Diagnosis: Protein C deficiency with recurrent venous thrombosis and postthrombosis syndrome.
Impairment Rating: 30% from underlying hemor- rhagic and thrombotic disorder and anticoagula- tion complications; 20% from lower extremity condition; combine for whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
208	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
9.7 Hematologic Impairment
Evaluation Summary
Table 9-5 gives an evaluation summary for the assessemnt of hematologic impairment.
================================================================================
Chapter 10
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Endocrine System
10.1 Principles of Assessment
10.2 Hypothalamic-Pituitary Axis
10.3 Thyroid
10.4 Parathyroids
10.5 Adrenal Cortex
10.6 Adrenal Medulla
10.7 Pancreas (Islets of Langerhans)
10.8 Gonads
10.9 Mammary Glands
10.10 Metabolic Bone Disease
10.11 Endocrine System Impairment Evaluation Summary
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating perma- nent impairment of the endocrine system. The endocrine system is composed of the hypothalmic- pituitary complex, thyroid, parathyroids, adrenals, islet cell tissue of the pancreas, and gonads. These ductless glands secrete hormones that regulate the activity of organs or tissues of the body. These hor- mones control growth, bone structure, sexual devel- opment and function, metabolism, and electrolyte balance. The various endocrine glands are usually interdependent, and a disorder of one gland may be reflected by dysfunction in one or more of the other endocrine glands, which, in turn, may affect other body systems. Consider multiple system effects when an endocrine permanent impairment is identified.

The following revisions have been made for the fifth edition: (1) the descriptions of endocrine gland func- tion and of disease states have been updated, as well as the techniques for evaluation of these diseases;
(2) the nomenclature of test procedures and of dis- ease entities, such as diabetes mellitus, has been updated; and (3) although the criteria for percentage of impairment have remained the same, many more examples of impairment have been included.


211


10.1 Principles of
	Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods of per- forming and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluations.

Dysfunction of an endocrine organ may be the result of an injury to the gland or of disease involving atro- phy, hypertrophy, hyperplasia, or neoplasia. An endocrine impairment develops from altered hor- mone secretion by one or more endocrine glands and the effect of such hormonal aberration on non- endocrine tissue. An impairment rating reflects the severity of the medical condition, the need for med- ication, and the effects of the impairment on the indi- vidual’s ability to perform activities of daily living.

When an endocrine disorder results in decreased secretion of a hormone, it is usually possible to replace the hormone by either the oral or the par- enteral route, resulting in virtual normalization of body physiology except, of course, for the inability to secrete the hormone. Apart from the need to take the medication on an ongoing basis, decreased secre- tion alone does not warrant an impairment rating. In cases where the replacement hormone does not com- pletely mimic physiologic hormone secretion, how- ever, the individual may be given an impairment rating to reflect the change in terms of either normal activity or ability to respond to stress.

Endocrine deficiencies may cause or be associated with impairments of other organ systems. Impairment ratings in other body systems are evaluated separately and then combined with the impairment rating from this chapter, using the Combined Values Chart
(p. 604) to determine the estimated whole person impairment.

Disorders resulting in increased secretion of a hor- mone often can be effectively treated. In some cases, treatment may leave the individual with a reduced ability to secrete the hormone. If so, the severity of the resulting condition and the effect on the ability to perform activities of daily living are evaluated to determine the impairment rating.


As stated in Chapter 2, even with appropriate med- ication, it is debatable whether the individual has regained the previous status of good health. Thus, the examiner may increase the impairment rating by a small percentage (1% to 3%) to account for an incomplete return to a condition of normal health.

10.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
The endocrine system has a wide array of glands, each with specific symptoms; these symptoms are discussed in each gland section.


10.1 b Description of Clinical Studies Clinical studies for the endocrine system generally assess hyperfunction (increased) or hypofunction (decreased) of a specific gland and are discussed in detail in each section.


10.2 Hypothalamic-
	Pituitary Axis
The hypothalamus and the pituitary are regarded as a unit because of their interdependent function. The hypothalamus produces chemical factors that either inhibit or enhance production of anterior pituitary hormones. The hypothalamus also produces precur- sors (prohormones) of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and oxytocin, which travel through neural axons and are stored in the posterior pituitary.

The anterior lobe of the pituitary gland, with modu- lation by the hypothalamus, produces trophic hor- mones that control the activity of the thyroid gland (thyrotropin [TSH]), the adrenal gland (corticotropin [ACTH]), and the gonads (luteinizing hormone [LH] and follicle-stimulating hormone [FSH]). The pro- duction of growth hormone (GH) and prolactin (PRL) in the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland is also modulated by hypothalamic substances. These two hormones, however, exert their effects directly upon the tissues of the body rather than through stimulation of other hormones. Growth hormone is responsible for growth of the skeleton before epiphy- seal closure and, in the adult, maintains normal fat, muscle, glucose, and skeletal metabolism, as well as a sense of well-being. For women, prolactin is neces- sary for lactation following delivery and for milk production in the suckling process. Its role in the male has not been ascertained.


The posterior lobe of the pituitary is an extension of hypothalamic neurons. It is the location where anti- diuretic hormone (vasopressin) and oxytocin are con- verted from their prohormone state and released into the blood. Antidiuretic hormone regulates the fluid balance of the body through its ability to influence the excretion of water. The actions of oxytocin may have a role in the process of labor.

Permanent impairments due to altered function of the thyroid gland, adrenal glands, gonads, and growth hormone are discussed in subsequent sections of this chapter.


10.2 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Hypothalamic and pituitary diseases can cause impairments through either structural abnormalities or alterations in hormone production. Structural changes resulting in end-organ impairment are con- sidered in the relevant chapter. Visual field abnor- malities are considered in Chapter 12, The Visual System. Temporal lobe seizures, frontal lobe abnor- malities, obstructive hydrocephalus, and nonen- docrine hypothalamic dysfunction are considered in Chapter 13, The Nervous System.

Hypersecretion by the anterior lobe may be mani- fested by (1) prolactin hypersecretion resulting from a microadenoma or macroadenoma (prolactinoma),
(2) growth hormone hypersecretion caused by a pitu- itary adenoma, or (3) corticotropin hypersecretion leading to adrenocortical hyperfunction. Prolactin excess results in hypogonadism, which in women may lead to amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea, infertil- ity, varying degrees of estrogen deficiency with its detrimental effect on the vascular and skeletal sys- tems, decreased libido, and galactorrhea. In men, it may result in decreased libido, impotence, or infertil- ity. Impairment from prolactin excess is equivalent to gonadotropic deficiency of the appropriate end organ, that is, secondary ovarian failure in women and testicular failure in men. Gonadal failure is dis- cussed further in Section 10.8 of this chapter.

When growth hormone hypersecretion occurs before epiphyseal closure, gigantism results; when hyper- secretion occurs in the adult, acromegaly results. The manifestations of acromegaly include enlargement of the hands and feet, coarseness of facial features, and prognathism. Fatigue and increased perspiration are common symptoms. Acromegaly of long duration leads to morbidity from degenerative arthritis, peripheral neuropathy, and shortened life expectancy resulting from an increased incidence of cardiovas- cular disease. Growth hormone excess may lead to insulin resistance and glucose intolerance, and it may precipitate or exacerbate diabetes mellitus.

Hyposecretion of a single or of multiple anterior lobe hormones is known as hypopituitarism, and the defi- ciencies may be either partial or complete. In the adult years, pituitary tumors, infarction (especially postpartum infarction), and surgical or radiothera- peutic interventions are the most common causes, with a lower incidence caused by granulomatous and infiltrative diseases and head trauma.

In adults, hypopituitarism most often results in hypogonadism and a deficiency of growth hormone production. The most common symptoms of hypogo- nadism in men are impotence, weakness, decreased motivation, and depression. The most common pre- senting symptom of hypogonadism in women is amenorrhea. Growth hormone deficiency is accom- panied most often by muscle weakness and reduced exercise capacity, fat accumulation (especially intra- abdominal), decreased bone density, lack of motiva- tion, a poor sense of well-being, and social isolation. Postpartum pituitary infarction also results in an inability to lactate. Hypopituitarism in a person with diabetes mellitus results in decreasing insulin requirements with an increased incidence of hypo- glycemic episodes. Effects of dysfunction of TSH and ACTH secretion will be discussed in Sections
10.3 and 10.5, respectively.

Hyperfunction of the posterior lobe, which causes the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH), may result from a variety of cen- tral nervous system disorders; however, SIADH is rarely permanent. Inability of the kidneys to secrete a water load leads to hyponatremia if water intake is not restricted. Fatigue and lethargy, progressing to confusion, coma, and seizures, may result depending on the degree of hyponatremia.


Hypofunction of the posterior lobe results in ADH deficiency and diabetes insipidus. Hypofunction usu- ally stems from diseases involving the hypothalamus or pituitary stalk and, less commonly, from diseases of the pituitary gland itself. The hypofunction may be hereditary, or it may be related to trauma, surgery, metastatic tumors, craniopharyngioma, histiocytosis X, or other conditions. If thirst response is normal, diabetes insipidus is mostly an inconvenience because of polyuria, polydipsia, and nocturia. If the inability to ingest an adequate amount of fluid ensues or if thirst is impaired because of concomitant hypothalamic disease, severe dehydration and hyper- natremia may result, leading to central nervous sys- tem changes, eg, mental depression or coma.


10.2 b Description of Clinical Studies Structural abnormalities are evaluated by roentgenograms of the sella turcica, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Angiography occasionally is required.
Evaluation of visual fields may be needed; vision impairments are discussed in Guides Chapter 12, The Visual System.

Hormonal function must be assessed, and this is often done by stimulation or suppression testing. Growth hormone deficiency is assessed by measur- ing GH in the blood after stimulation testing with insulin, exercise, levodopa, arginine, or other agents. Corticotropin deficiency is assessed by measuring serum corticotropin and cortisol levels and by stimu- lation testing with insulin or corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH).

The diagnosis of secondary hypothyroidism (pitu- itary and hypothalamic hypothyroidism) is made by demonstrating low concentrations of thyroid hor- mones without elevation of the thyrotropin level. In this circumstance, CT scanning or MRI and tests of pituitary function, including measurement of thy- rotropin secretion after an injection of protirelin (TRH), are needed to determine whether the hypo- thalamus or the pituitary is responsible. Secondary gonadal insufficiency, that is, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, requires the demonstration of end- organ failure, with low testosterone levels in men and low estrogen levels in women, as well as low or normal levels of the gonadotropins, LH and FSH.

Insufficiency of antidiuretic hormone requires the documentation of urine hyposmolality in the face of a stimulus to concentrate urine, usually water restric- tion. Subsequently, an increase in urine osmolality in response to ADH administration must be demon- strated. Prolactin deficiency is documented by low basal levels of the hormone and its failure to increase after an injection of TRH, chlorpromazine, or other stimulating agents.

Growth hormone excess is documented by the failure to suppress GH concentration after a glucose load.
Prolactin excess is documented by measurement of elevated basal levels of prolactin. Inappropriate secretion of ADH is documented by hyponatremia with inappropriately elevated urine osmolality, in the presence of normal cardiac, renal, adrenal, and thy- roid function.


10.2 c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Hypothalamic-Pituitary Axis Disorders
The assessment of permanent impairment of the whole person from disorders of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis requires evaluation of (l) primary abnormalities related to GH, prolactin, or ADH; (2) secondary abnor- malities in other endocrine glands, such as thyroid, adrenal, and gonads; and (3) structural and functional disorders of the central nervous system caused by anatomic abnormalities of the pituitary.

The examiner must evaluate each disorder separately, using the guidelines in this or other chapters, such as those on the visual system (Chapter 12), nervous sys- tem (Chapter 13), or mental and behavioral disorders (Chapter 14). The estimated impairments of the vari- ous organ systems then should be combined by means of the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
Criteria for evaluating permanent impairment result- ing from hypothalamic-pituitary axis disorders are given in Table 10-1.


An individual with hypothalamic-pituitary disease belongs in class 1 when the disease can be controlled effectively with continuous treatment, with minimal impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living. If a person does not take the medication, a different degree of impairment may result.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-1
0% to 15% Impairment Due to Traumatic Diabetes Insipidus

Subject: 19-year-old man.
History: Head trauma from a motor vehicle crash 15 months earlier. Fluid intake and output ranged from 4 to 7 L/d.
Current Symptoms: Severe thirst; increased fre- quency of urination. Nocturia occurred three to six times, and thirst during the night is marked. General health excellent except for fatigue related to interrupted sleep. Symptoms recur if a dose of desmopressin (DDAVP) is missed. No other endocrine disease found; able to carry out ordi- nary daily activities.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: On initial assessment, serum osmolality: 292 mmol/kg H2O (292 mOsm/kg H2O); serum sodium concentration: 142 mmol/L (142 mEq/L); urine osmolality: 120 mmol/kg H2O (120 mOsm/kg H2O); specific gravity: 1.003. No glycosuria. Attempt at water deprivation led to severe thirst with a serum osmolality of 302 mmol/kg H2O (302 mOsm/kg H2O) and urine osmolality of 150 mmol/kg H2O (150 mOsm/kg H2O). After an initial antidiuretic hormone (ADH) injection, urine osmolality rose to 450 mmol/kg H2O (450 mOsm/kg H2O) and urine volume diminished. Individual was placed on regimen of DDAVP, 0.1 mL (10 µg) twice daily by nasal spray; on this regimen, feels well and urine output is well controlled.

Diagnosis: Traumatic diabetes insipidus controlled by treatment.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment due to diabetes insipidus; combine with assessment for any addi- tional behavioral effects from the head injury (see Guides Chapter 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders, and the Combined Values Chart, p.
604) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Minimal effects on ability to perform activities of daily living when the diabetes insipidus is controlled by treatment.
---END EXAMPLE---

An individual with hypothalamic-pituitary disease belongs in class 2 when the related symptoms and signs are inadequately controlled by treatment and impact ability to perform activities of daily living.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example10-2
16% to 25% Impairment Due to Acromegaly


Subject: 57-year-old man.
History: After treatment of a growth hormone– secreting tumor, headaches were relieved, but symptoms of fatigue, excess perspiration, and joint discomfort continued. Despite an attempt at surgical excision and ionizing radiation therapy, growth hormone (GH) level remained elevated at 4400 pmol/L (100 ng/mL) and individual unable to tolerate bromocriptine therapy. Testosterone level was low, but thyroid and adrenal function remained normal. Libido improved with bimonthly injections of testosterone; carpal tunnel syndrome required surgical therapy.
Current Symptoms: Pain in knees and back; decreased libido.


Physical Exam: Clinical hyperhidrosis; carpal tun- nel syndrome; enlargement of hands, feet, and nose.
Clinical Studies: Enlarged sella turcica with suprasellar extension of a pituitary tumor. No visual field abnormalities. GH level: 25 300 pmol/L (575 ng/mL)—markedly elevated.
Diagnosis: Moderately severe acromegaly, inade- quately controlled by therapy.
Impairment Rating: 16% impairment due to acromegaly and 5% impairment due to testos- terone deficiency combine to 19% impairment
of the whole person (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Combine endocrine impairment with upper extremity impairment from carpal tunnel syndrome.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-3
16% to 25% Impairment Due to Hypothalamic-Pituitary Axis Disease

Subject: 26-year-old woman.
History: Following a delivery complicated by exces- sive blood loss and hypotension, failed to lactate; was not seen again until 6 months later.
Current Symptoms: Failure to resume menstrual cyclicity; progressively worsening fatigue, anorexia, and weight loss.
Physical Exam: Blood pressure (BP): 90/60 mm Hg; pulse rate (PR): 100 BPM. Sparse pubic and axil- lary hair; cool, dry skin; slow return of Achilles’ deep tendon reflexes; visual fields: normal.
Clinical Studies: Prolactin and thyrotropin (TSH) levels: low and unresponsive to 500 µg intravenous protirelin (TRH). Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH): unrespon- sive to administration of luteinizing hormone- releasing hormone (LHRH). Attenuated response of cortisol to insulin-induced hypoglycemia and growth hormone unresponsive. Serum free thyrox- ine: low—7.7 pmol/L (0.6 ng/dL); TSH not ele- vated—0.2 µIU/L (0.2 µU/mL).
Diagnosis: Postpartum pituitary apoplexy (Sheehan’s syndrome) with panhypopituitarism.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment due to panhy- popituitarism; 10% impairment due to replace- ment for multiple hormones; combine (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to obtain whole person impairment.

Comment: Panhypopituitarism will remain perma- nent, requiring lifelong hormone replacement. With levothyroxine, hydrocortisone, and dehy- droepiandrosterone replacement, normal adrenal and thyroid balance are established, but additional hydrocortisone is required at physiologically stressful times. The individual remains infertile and unable to lactate. Growth hormone replace- ment requires daily injections of very expensive human growth hormone. Fertility may be induced by hormonal stimulation of the ovary, but this is not always successful.
---END EXAMPLE---

An individual with hypothalamic-pituitary disease belongs in class 3 when severe symptoms and signs persist despite treatment and significantly impact ability to perform activities of daily living.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-4
26% to 50% Impairment Due to Hypothalamic-Pituitary Axis Disease

Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Seen initially at age 45 because of an enlarged sella turcica. Evaluation revealed testos- terone deficiency; no suprasellar extension of the tumor. Individual was not treated; was lost to follow-up. Several years later, hospitalized with complaints of excruciating headache, visual loss, and impotence. Underwent emergency transsphe- noidal pituitary decompression under coverage with glucocorticoids. Vision was unchanged, and mild headaches persisted. Unable to tolerate bromocriptine. Despite testosterone administra- tion, continued to have erectile dysfunction.
Physical Exam: Beard markedly diminished; had a female escutcheon. Testing of visual fields showed nearly complete loss of vision in left eye and temporal field defect in right eye with
macular involvement. After decompression, visual acuity in left eye limited to finger counting; tem- poral field loss in right eye remained.


Clinical Studies: Skull roentgenogram: massively enlarged sella turcica. CT scan: extensive suprasellar growth of the tumor, with a suggestion of hemorrhage into the tumor. Preoperative pro- lactin concentration: 1000 µg/L (1000 ng/mL); postoperative prolactin level: remained elevated at 660 µg/L (660 ng/mL). In postoperative period, received course of ionizing radiation to the sella turcica. Subsequent evaluation revealed elevated prolactin concentration of 280 µg/L (280 ng/mL), low testosterone concentration, deficient cortisol response to hypoglycemia, and decreased thyroid function.
Diagnosis: Prolactin-secreting pituitary adenoma with pituitary apoplexy, secondary panhypopitu- itarism, and vision loss.
Impairment Rating: 26% impairment due to pitu- itary dysfunction, secondary adrenal dysfunction, and secondary testosterone deficiency; combine with impairments from loss of visual acuity and from persistent headaches (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impair- ment.
Comment: Regular monitoring and lifelong medica- tion required.
---END EXAMPLE---

10.3 Thyroid

10.3 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
The thyroid gland, through its secretion of hormones, influences the metabolic rate of many organ systems. Hypersecretion and hyposecretion of thyroid hor- mones cause impairments. Hypersecretion by the thy- roid gland results in hyperthyroidism and may be manifested by nervousness, weight loss, heat intoler- ance, goiter, tachycardia, palpitation, atrial fibrillation, frequent bowel movements, tremor, and muscle weak- ness. Eye changes, such as exophthalmos and double vision, may also be present. Hyposecretion by the thy- roid gland results in hypothyroidism and may be man- ifested by lethargy, slowing of mental processes, weakness, cold intolerance, dry skin, constipation, and myxedema. Late complications include myocardial insufficiency, effusions into body cavities, and coma. Hypothyroidism in infancy may be associated with failure of physical and mental development.
10.3
b Description of Clinical Studies These include, but are not limited to, determination of (1) circulating thyroid hormone levels, including
total thyroxine, free thyroxine, triiodothyronine, and free triiodothyronine; (2) circulating pituitary thy- rotropin level measured by a sensitive assay;
(3) radioiodine uptake of the thyroid gland; (4) thy- roid antibodies; and (5) radiotriiodothyronine resin or red blood cell uptake. The nature of thyroid nod- ules is often best evaluated by needle aspiration or biopsy.


10.3 c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Thyroid Disease
In practically all individuals with hyperthyroidism, the condition can be corrected by treatment and there is no loss in the ability to perform activities of daily living. However, the ophthalmopathy seen in some cases of hyperthyroidism may persist after treatment of the thyrotoxic state and result in permanent cos- metic disfigurement or visual impairment. In severe cases, loss of vision may result. These conditions should be evaluated as described in the chapters on the ear, nose, throat, and related structures (Chapter 11) and the visual system (Chapter 12). When atrial fibrillation persists following adequate treatment of hyperthyroidism, this condition should be evaluated as described in the chapters on the cardiovascular system (Chapters 3 and 4).

In most instances, hypothyroidism can be controlled satisfactorily by the administration of thyroid med- ication. Occasionally, because of associated disease in other organ systems, full hormone replacement may not be possible. Table 10-2 gives the criteria for rating permanent impairment due to thyroid disease.


Diagnosis: Hashimoto’s thyroiditis controlled by treatment.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Regular monitoring of thyroid disease.
---END EXAMPLE---

An individual belongs in class l when (1) continuous thyroid therapy is required for correction of the thyroid insufficiency or for maintenance of normal thyroid anatomy and (2) there is no objective physical or labo- ratory evidence of inadequate replacement therapy.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-5
0% to 15% Impairment Due to Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis
Subject: 45-year-old woman.
History: Symptoms of mild hypothyroidism of 2 years’ duration. Required daily therapy with 0.20 mg of levothyroxine to maintain normal-sized thyroid, although symptoms of hormone defi- ciency were relieved by a lower dose.
Current Symptoms: Easily fatigued; feels cold often.
Physical Exam: Enlarged thyroid.
Clinical Studies: Needle biopsy: indicated lym- phoepithelial goiter (Hashimoto’s thyroiditis).

An individual belongs in class 2 when (1) symptoms and signs of thyroid disease are present or (2) there is anatomic loss or alteration, and (3) continuous thy- roid hormone replacement therapy is required for correction of the confirmed thyroid insufficiency, and (4) the presence of a disease process in another body system permits only partial replacement of the thyroid hormone.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-6
16% to 25% Impairment Due to Hypothyroidism


Subject: 65-year-old man.
History: Severe hypothyroidism of 16 months’ dura- tion, with pronounced mental slowing, loss of memory, and apathy. Also had severe coronary artery disease with angina pectoris that could be precipitated by walking only 50 ft. Repeated trials and careful adjustment of doses of levothyroxine indicated that a dose larger than 0.05 mg/d caused aggravation of the angina. Significant debility due to hypothyroidism persisted.
Current Symptoms: Angina; persistent fatigue; inability to maintain concentration; constipation.
Physical Exam: BP: 105/70 mm Hg. Dry skin; slowed reflexes.
Clinical Studies: Total thyroxine level: 6.4 nmol/L (0.5 mcg/dL). Thyrotropin level: 100 µIU/L (100 mIU/mL).


Diagnosis: Partially treated hypothyroidism.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment due to hypothyroidism; combine with an appropriate value for the cardiovascular impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: If the cardiovascular disease were treated, for instance, by angioplasty or bypass sur- gery, it might be possible to fully replace the thy- roid hormone level, in which case the impairment rating would need to be reevaluated.
---END EXAMPLE---

10.4  Parathyroids
The secretion of parathyroid hormone from the four parathyroid glands regulates the levels of serum calcium and phosphorus, which are essential to the proper functioning of the skeletal, digestive, renal, and nervous systems. The major abnormalities of the glands include hyperfunction, hypofunction, and carcinoma.


10.4 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Hypersecretion of parathyroid hormone, or hyper- parathyroidism, may be due to the hyperfunctioning of one gland, as with an adenoma, or that of all four glands, as with hyperplasia, or may result from a parathyroid carcinoma. Manifestations of this condi- tion include lethargy, constipation, nausea, vomiting, and polyuria, and, in extreme cases, bone pain, renal calculi, renal failure, and coma.

Hyposecretion of parathyroid hormone, or hypoparathyroidism, may be congenital in origin or due to inadvertent removal of the parathyroid glands during thyroidectomy, surgical excision for the treat- ment of hyperparathyroidism, or unknown causes.
Manifestations include chronic fatigue, paresthesia, tetany, and seizures. Additionally, in idiopathic cases, there may be cataracts, chronic moniliasis of the skin, alopecia, and hypofunction of other endocrine organs, including hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, adrenal insufficiency, hypogonadism, and pernicious anemia.
10.4
b Description of Clinical Studies Techniques for evaluating parathyroid gland function include determinations of serum calcium, phospho- rus, albumin, creatinine, magnesium, parathyroid hormone levels, 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D, calcium con- centration in urine, and urinary cyclic adenosine monophosphate response to intravenously adminis- tered parathyroid hormone. Intravenous pyelography, skeletal roentgenography, and bone density studies may be useful. Ultrasonography, MRI, and CT and sestamibi scanning are useful tools in localizing parathyroid adenomas.


10.4 c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Parathyroid Disease
Hyperparathyroidism
In most cases of hyperparathyroidism, surgical treat- ment results in correction of the primary abnormality, although secondary symptoms and signs may persist, such as fracture, renal calculi, or renal failure. The lat- ter signs should be evaluated according to criteria in the chapters on the urinary and reproductive systems (Chapter 7) or musculoskeletal system (Chapters 15 through 17). If surgery fails, or if the individual cannot undergo surgery, long-term therapy may be necessary, in which case the permanent impairment may be clas- sified according to the criteria in Table 10-3.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-7
0% to 14% Impairment Due to Hyperparathyroidism


Subject: 45-year-old woman.
History: Hypercalcemia of 11.8 mg/dL was found on routine blood chemistry analysis.
Current Symptoms: No symptoms of hypercal- cemia.
Physical Exam: Normal.


Clinical Studies: Repeat serum calcium: 2.90 mmol/L (11.6 mg/dL); serum phosphorus: 0.90
mmol/L (2.8 mg/dL); hypercalciuria: 376 mg/24 h. Serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) by
immunoradiometric assay (IRMA): elevated—110 pg/mL. Complete blood count, electrolytes, and serum urea nitrogen (BUN): normal. Serum levels of calcium, phosphorus, and PTH returned to nor- mal following surgical removal of a single parathyroid adenoma.
Diagnosis: Primary hyperparathyroidism.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Surgical removal of the adenoma resulted in a cure, leaving no detrimental impact on the individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-8
0% to 14% Impairment Due to Hyperparathyroidism

Subject: 28-year-old man.
History: Subsequent to an episode of renal colic and passing a calcium oxalate stone, hypercalcemia of
12.3 mg/dL was found with mild hypophos- phatemia and an elevated serum PTH level, which were corrected following surgical treatment of parathyroid hyperplasia.
Current Symptoms: 3 months postoperatively, asymptomatic other than periodic episodes of vague left flank pain.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Serum calcium, phosphorus, and PTH levels, as well as urinary calcium excretion: normal. Renal ultrasound: a large calculus in the left renal pelvis.
Diagnosis: Primary hyperparathyroidism with ureterolithiasis and a residual large renal calculus.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person due to hyperparathyroidism and continued risk of the renal calculus.
Comment: Impairment will decrease if the stone can be removed and the symptoms abate.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-9
15% to 29% Impairment Due to Hyperparathyroidism


Subject: 38-year-old man.
History: Consequent to diagnosis of primary hyper- parathyroidism, neck exploration did not reveal presence of a parathyroid adenoma; treatment consisted of removal of 31/2 parathyroid glands.
Current Symptoms: Persistent fatigue, mild nausea, polyuria, and nocturia.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Serum calcium: 3.50 mmol/L (14.0 mg/dL); phosphorus: 0.65 mmol/L (2.0 mg/dL); PTH by IRMA: 23.2 pmol/L (220 pg/mL); urinary calcium excretion: 190 mg/24 h. Complete blood count, BUN, and electrolytes: normal other than mild depression of bicarbonate to 19 mmol/L (19 mEq/L). Ultrasonography and sestamibi and CT scans failed to reveal presence of parathyroid tissue in either neck or chest.
Diagnosis: Primary hyperparathyroidism.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Impairment remains until the source of hyperparathyroidism can be ascertained and cor- rected.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-10
15% to 29% Impairment Due to Hyperparathyroidism


Subject: 76-year-old woman.
History: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) treated with inhaled bronchodilators and sporadic use of systemic glucocorticoids; was noted to have a serum calcium level of 3.05 mmol/L (12.2 mg/dL).
Current Symptoms: Mild anorexia, nocturia three times, and lethargy, in addition to respiratory dis- tress symptoms of COPD.
Physical Exam: Physical signs of poor respiratory air exchange with sporadic wheezes. No palpable neck mass.
Clinical Studies: Serum calcium: 3.10 mmol/L (12.4 mg/dL); phosphorus: 0.67 mmol/L (2.1 mg/dL); PTH by IRMA: elevated—165 pg/mL; urinary calcium excretion: 380 mg/24 h.
Sestamibi scanning and MRI suggested presence of a retroesophageal parathyroid adenoma.
Diagnosis: Primary hyperparathyroidism due to an ectopic location of a parathyroid adenoma.


Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Due to the comorbid state of COPD, intrathoracic surgery was felt to carry too great a risk. Therefore, medical treatment consisting of adequate hydration and exercise, as well as avoid- ance of prolonged immobilization, use of diuret- ics, and calcium ingestion in excess of 800 mg per day was advised.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-11
30% to 90% Impairment Due to Hyperparathyroidism

Subject: 72-year-old man.
History: Diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma made at time of surgical resection 1 year ago.
Current Symptoms: Progressive fatigue, lethargy, mild confusion, polyuria, nocturia, and one episode of ureterolithiasis 3 months ago.
Physical Exam: Elderly appearing, thin, pale male who was lethargic but easily arousable, slow in mentation, and spoke with a hoarse voice.
Presence of a 3 ? 5-cm irregularly hard mass in lower right anterior portion of the neck; causes deviation of the trachea to the left.
Clinical Studies: Serum calcium: 4.25 mmol/L (17.0 mg/dL); phosphorus: 0.52 mmol/L (1.6 mg/dL); alkaline phosphatase: 350 U/L; urinary calcium excretion: 510 mg/24 h.
Diagnosis: Hyperparathyroidism due to recurrent parathyroid carcinoma.
Impairment Rating: 50% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Treated with intravenous hydration and pamidronate and then referred for surgical “debulking” of the tumor. Prognosis of this dis- ease is poor, and recurrent severe hypercalcemia can be expected.
---END EXAMPLE---
Hypoparathyroidism
Hypoparathyroidism is a chronic condition of vari- able severity that requires long-term medical therapy in most cases. The degree of severity determines the estimated permanent impairment rating, as Table 10-4 indicates.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-12
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Hypoparathyroidism


Subject: 42-year-old man.
History: 24 hours postoperatively for removal of a large parathyroid adenoma, develops hypocal- cemia.
Current Symptoms: Perioral and peripheral pares- thesias.
Physical Exam: Sutured surgical incision in lower anterior portion of the neck; Chvostek’s sign present.
Clinical Studies: Serum calcium: 1.90 mmol/L (7.6 mg/dL); phosphorus: 1.45 mmol/L (4.5 mg/dL).
Diagnosis: Transient hypoparathyroidism.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Hypoparathyroidism, which often occurs in this situation, is transient and due to the sup- pressive effect of the overactive parathyroid ade- noma on the remaining parathyroid tissue. Full recovery occurs within several weeks.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-13
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Hypoparathyroidism

Subject: 62-year-old woman.
History: Surgical treatment for parathyroid hyper- plasia 5 years ago. Due to persistent mild hypocalcemia since surgery, has required daily replacement with 1000 mg of elemental calcium, which has kept her asymptomatic and with normal calcium levels.
Current Symptoms: Over the past week, ran out of calcium supplement and has developed mild peri- oral and peripheral paresthesias.
Physical Exam: Unremarkable with the exception of bilateral Chvostek’s sign.
Clinical Studies: Serum calcium: 2.05 mmol/L (8.2 mg/dL); phosphorus: 1.55 mmol/L (4.8 mg/dL); both returned to normal with resumption of cal- cium replacement.
Diagnosis: Surgically induced hypoparathyroidism; mild.
Impairment Rating: 3% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: With continual daily use of safe and inexpensive calcium replacement, remains asymp- tomatic and with no increased likelihood of mor- bidity.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-14
10% to 20% Impairment Due to Hypoparathyroidism

Patient: 58-year-old man.
History: Surgical removal of 31/2 parathyroid glands, as treatment for hyperparathyroidism due to parathyroid hyperplasia; 3 months later, remains hypocalcemic despite daily ingestion of 1000 mg of elemental calcium and 0.25 µg of calcitriol.
Current Symptoms: Frequent episodes of periph- eral paresthesias and muscular irritability, wors- ened with physical exercise.
Physical Exam: Well-healed surgical scar present in mid-lower anterior neck. Chvostek’s and Trousseau’s signs easily elicited.
Clinical Studies: Serum calcium: 1.80 mmol/L (7.2 mg/dL); phosphorus: 1.48 mmol/L (4.6 mg/dL); serum levels of creatinine, albumin, and elec- trolytes: normal. Serum calcium and phosphorus levels corrected to normal upon raising the daily doses of elemental calcium and calcitriol to 1500 mg and 0.5 µg, respectively.

Diagnosis: Surgically induced hypoparathyroidism.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Due to persistence of hypocalcemia 3 months postoperatively, despite use of calcitriol and calcium supplementation, hypoparathy- roidism will most probably be permanent. The individual requires lifelong treatment and can per- form many activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---

10.5  Adrenal Cortex
The adrenal cortex synthesizes and secretes adreno- cortical hormones. These hormones participate in the regulation of electrolyte and water metabolism and in the intermediate metabolism of carbohydrate, fat, and protein. They also affect inflammatory response, cell membrane permeability, and immunologic responses, and they play a role in the development and maintenance of secondary sexual characteristics.

Impairment may result from either hypersecretion or hyposecretion of the cortical hormones. Such abnor- malities may be associated with dysfunction of another endocrine gland, for example, the pituitary. If this occurs, the adrenal impairment and the impair- ment related to the other gland are both evaluated, and the impairments are combined by means of the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to determine the whole person impairment.


10.5 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Hypersecretion of adrenocortical hormones results from hyperplasia or from benign or malignant tumors of the adrenal cortex. The symptoms and signs of adrenocortical disease may arise from hypersecretion of one or more of the following hor- mones: (1) glucocorticoids, (2) mineralocorticoids,
(3) androgens, and (4) estrogens. In some instances, there may be hypersecretion of hormones in one cat- egory and hyposecretion of those in another. Iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome secondary to supra- physiologic doses of glucocorticoids administered for systemic diseases such as bronchial asthma, sys- temic lupus erythematosus, or rheumatoid arthritis is the most common condition related to adrenal hor- monal excess.


Among the diseases caused by hypersecretion of the adrenocortical hormones are Cushing’s syndrome, the adrenogenital syndrome, and primary aldostero- nism. Hypersecretion of the adrenal cortex caused by hyperplasia may be associated either with a tumor of the anterior pituitary gland or with a malignant tumor that arises outside the endocrine system and causes ectopic corticotropin secretion.

Hyposecretion of adrenocortical hormones may be primary, resulting from surgical removal or destruc- tion of the adrenals, as with Addison’s disease or by metastatic cancer; secondary, resulting from decreased production of corticotropin; or tertiary, resulting from decreased production of corticotropin- releasing hormone by the hypothalamus. Therapy is guided by the number of hormonal deficiencies, which may be single, as in hypoaldosteronism, or multiple, as in adrenocortical destruction. One nor- mal adrenal gland can compensate for the loss of the other.


10.5 b Description of Clinical Studies These techniques include (1) measurement of adrenocortical hormones in the urine, such as free cortisol and aldosterone, and of hormones in the plasma, such as cortisol and aldosterone; (2) meas-
urement of corticotropin, serum electrolytes, plasma glucose, and creatinine; (3) measurement of the effects of suppression and stimulation of adrenocorti- cal function; and (4) roentgenography of the adrenal glands, CT scanning, MRI, arteriography, and venog- raphy of the pituitary drainage.


10.5 c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Adrenal Cortex Disease
Hypoadrenalism is a lifelong condition that requires long-term replacement therapy with glucocorti- coids and/or mineralocorticoids for proven hormonal deficiencies. Evaluation of improvement may be difficult because a person may be fully functional
on an everyday basis while taking replacement medication but not be able to respond properly to the stress of fever, trauma, infection, or very warm weather. This impaired ability to respond to stress needs careful consideration. Impairments should be classified according to Table 10-5.


*This would be considered a permanent impairment only if the episodes recurred and could not be controlled with therapy.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-15
0% to 14% Impairment Due to Hypoadrenalism


Subject: 28-year-old woman.
History: Severe poison ivy; treated with 40 mg of prednisone daily for 7 days; subsequent tapering of the dose and discontinuation after 16 days of treatment.
Current Symptoms: Marked fatigue and weakness, especially in the erect position.
Physical Exam: BP: 120/80 mm Hg with PR 72 BPM when supine; 100/65 mm Hg and 92 BPM when erect.
Clinical Studies: Serum sodium: 128 mmol/L (128 mEq/L); potassium: 5.6 mmol/L (5.6 mEq/L); plasma cortisol at 8 AM: 221 mmol/L
(8 µg/dL) and poorly responsive to the administra- tion of cosyntropin (Cortrosyn). Replacement dose of prednisone was started, more gradually tapered, and discontinued over the next 6 months, resulting in complete restoration of adrenal function.
Diagnosis: Adrenal insufficiency due to the adminis- tration of exogenous glucocorticoid.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Individual was relatively adrenal insuffi- cient during treatment, but following tapering and discontinuation of prednisone treatment, had nor- mal adrenal function.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-16
0% to 14% Impairment Due to Hypoadrenalism

Subject: 32-year-old woman.
History: 10-year history of autoimmune thyroiditis; mother has pernicious anemia.
Current Symptoms: Over the past year has devel- oped progressive fatigue, weakness, and periodic nausea; weight loss of 6.75 kg (15 lb). Also has periodic postural dizziness and has developed a craving for salt.
Physical Exam: Thin female weighing 49.5 kg (110 lb), with sporadic areas of vitiligo and hyperpig- mentation, most notable in creases of the hands, elbows, knees, neck, and face. BP: 120/80 mm Hg in the supine position; decreased to 100/65 mm Hg in the erect position, with a compensatory tachycardia. Both axillary and pubic hair sparse.
Clinical Studies: Serum sodium: 122 mmol/L (122 mEq/L); potassium: 6.0 mmol/L (6.0 mEq/L); BUN: 10.71 mmol/L (30 mg/dL). Plasma corti- cotropin at 8 AM: elevated—44 pmol/L (200 pg/mL); plasma cortisol: low for 8 AM: 221 nmol/L (8 µg/dL), rising only to 276 nmol/L (10 µg/dL) following intramuscular injection of 250 µg of cosyntropin (Cortrosyn). Serum levels of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S) and free testosterone: low; thyroid hormone levels: normal.
Diagnosis: Addison’s disease.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Hypoadrenalism will be permanent, with the individual requiring lifelong treatment with an adrenal glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid in order to perform usual activities of daily living.
Dermatologic changes may remain and, if signifi- cant, can be evaluated in the skin chapter (Chapter 8) and combined with the endocrine impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-17
15% to 29% Impairment Due to Hypoadrenalsim

Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: 8-year history of Addison’s disease and 3- year history of depression exacerbated by the death of his mother. As a result of his depression, he often skipped his glucocorticoid and mineralo- corticoid replacement medication, sometimes for as long as 3 or 4 days at a time.

Current Symptoms: Weakness, malaise, nausea, and vomiting for the past 3 days.
Physical Exam: BP: 105/60 mm Hg with PR 92 BPM when supine; 80/40 mm Hg and 112 BPM when erect. Moderately dehydrated with hyper- pigmentation, most notable in creases of the hands, elbows, knees, neck, and face.
Clinical Studies: Serum sodium: 120 mmol/L (120 mEq/L); potassium: 5.6 mmol/L (5.6 mEq/L); BUN: 11.4 mmol/L (32 mg/dL). With resumption of usual steroid regimen, metabolic abnormalities of adrenal insufficiency abated.
Diagnosis: Addison’s disease; depression.
Impairment Rating: 20% due to Addison’s disease; combine with appropriate rating for depression (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Due to depression and its impairment of the individual’s ability to take medications regu- larly, he suffers a greater impairment from Addison’s disease.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-18
15% to 29% Impairment Due to Hypoadrenalism


Subject: 68-year-old woman.
History: 20-year history of Addison’s disease and 5- year history of diverticulosis. During treatment of frequent episodes of diverticulitis, her glucocorti- coid dose requires adjustment due to the accom- panying state of relative adrenal insufficiency.
Current Symptoms: 3 days of progressively wors- ening left lower quadrant abdominal pain, with fever to 38.4°C (101°F); accompanied by weak- ness, malaise, nausea, and vomiting.
Physical Exam: Marked tenderness in left lower quadrant of the abdomen, without rebound. BP: 110/70 mm Hg with PR 86 BPM when supine; 95/55 mm Hg and 108 BPM when erect. Mucous membranes dry.


Clinical Studies: Serum sodium: 126 mmol/L (126 mEq/L); potassium: 5.2 mmol/L (5.2 mEq/L); BUN: 10.7 mmol/L (30 mg/dL); Westergren ery- throcyte sedimentation rate (WSR): 64 mm/h; white blood cell count: 15 000 103/µL), with pre- dominance of neutrophilic leukocytes. All symp- toms, physical signs, and metabolic abnormalities of adrenal insufficiency abated with her maintain- ing fludrocortisone dosage at 0.1 mg per day and increasing hydrocortisone dosage to 90 mg per day, which was later decreased to her usual dosage as the diverticulitis responded to treat- ment.
Diagnosis: Addison’s disease with intercurrent febrile illness.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Continuing to take her daily adrenal hor- mone replacement. There were minimal effects on this individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living. However, these frequent episodes of an intercurrent illness illustrate the degree of adre- nal insufficiency with its increase in morbidity and possibly mortality.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-19
30% to 90% Impairment Due to Hypoadrenalism

Subject: 72-year-old man.
History: 20-year history of Addison’s disease.
Myocardial infarction 2 years ago, followed by congestive heart failure requiring treatment with digoxin, ACE inhibitor, and diuretics. With wors- ening periods of congestive heart failure, gluco- corticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement requirement increased, often contributing to the fluid-retentive state.
Current Symptoms: Dyspnea on exertion, orthop- nea, dependent edema, weakness, fatigue, and nausea.
Physical Exam: BP: 105/70 mm Hg with PR 104 BPM when supine; 90/55 mm Hg and 120 BPM when erect. Bibasilar rales, 3+ bipedal edema, vitiligo on back and chest, hyperpigmentation of appendectomy scar and in the creases of elbows, knees, and hands.
Clinical Studies: Serum sodium: 122 mmol/L (122 mEq/L); potassium: 3.6 mmol/L (3.6 mEq/L);
BUN: 14.9 mmol/L (42 mg/dL).

Diagnosis: Addison’s disease; congestive heart failure.
Impairment Rating: 60% impairment due to Addison’s disease; combine with appropriate rat- ing for congestive heart failure (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Difficult to adequately control adrenal insufficiency due to its detrimental effect on the status of congestive heart failure.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-20
30% to 90% Impairment Due to Hypoadrenalism


Subject: 46-year-old man.
History: 40-year history of type 1 diabetes mellitus with poor glycemic control during most of this period; accompanied by proliferative retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy, and a hypnotic bladder. 10-year history of Addison’s disease, well con- trolled with physiologic amounts of hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone acetate. Periodic infections, including pyelonephritis, have required adjust- ments of both insulin and hydrocortisone doses.
Admitted to hospital because of pyelonephritis due to Candida albicans with sepsis.
Current Symptoms: Fever with shaking chills, fatigue, weakness, and nausea.
Physical Exam: Temperature: 38.9°C (102°F); BP: 110/80 mm Hg, PR: 76 BPM when supine; BP: 80/85 mm Hg, PR: 76 BPM when erect.
Hyperpigmentation of lower extremity scars and in the creases of the elbows, hands, and knees.
Clinical Studies: Serum sodium: 123 mmol/L (123 mEq/L); potassium: 5.8 mmol/L (5.8 mEq/L); three blood cultures grew out Candida albicans.
Diagnosis: Addison’s disease; type 1 diabetes melli- tus; Candida sepsis and pyelonephritis.
Impairment Rating: 70% impairment due to Addison’s disease; combine with rating due to Candida sepsis to determine whole person impair- ment.
Comment: Hydrocortisone dose increased to 50 mg/d; has not been replaced to the full physio- logic requirement due to its interference with host defense mechanisms and the effect of masking signs of infection. Difficult to adequately control adrenal insufficiency due to its detrimental effect on the status of Candida sepsis.
---END EXAMPLE---

Hyperadrenocorticism caused by the chronic side effects of supraphysiologic doses of glucocorticoids, that is, iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome, is related to dosage and duration of treatment and may cause osteoporosis, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and the catabolic effects that result in cataracts, aseptic necrosis, myopathy, striae, and easy bruising.
Permanent impairments may range from 0% to 100%, depending on the severity and chronicity of the disease process for which the steroids are given. Impairments from diseases of the pituitary-adrenal axis should be estimated according to Table 10-6.


* This table should be used to evaluate impairments due to the general effects of adrenal steroids, such as myopathy, easy bruising, and obesity. The estimated percentages should be combined with those related to specific impairments, such as diabetes or fractures due to osteoporosis, by means of the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

† The degree of estimated impairment will depend on the effects of the tumor on other organ systems; appropriate Guides chapters should be consulted


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-21
0% to 14% Impairment Due to Hyperadrenocorticism

Subject: 30-year-old woman.
History: Unremarkable other than the delivery of two children, who are now 6 and 4 years old.
Current Symptoms: 2 years of progressive weak- ness, easy bruisability, hirsutism, facial acne, weight gain, and depression.
Physical Exam: BP: 160/95 mm Hg; PR: 68 BPM. Marked central obesity with moderate peripheral muscle wasting and notable proximal muscle weakness. Rounded and acne-covered face. Red striae present over buttocks, flanks, and lower abdomen, bilaterally. Mildly increased vellus hair growth on face and lower arms; dark terminal hair on upper chest and upper abdomen.

Clinical Studies: Diurnal variation of cortisol secre- tion was lost as suggested by plasma cortisol con- centrations: 690 nmol/L (25 µg/dL) and 607 nmol/L (22 µg/dL) at 8 AM and 4 PM, respectively. Urinary free cortisol excretion: elevated—966 nmol/d (350 µg/24 h); plasma corticotropin (ACTH): unmeasurable. Plasma cortisol and uri- nary free cortisol excretion failed to suppress dur- ing standard 2-day suppression tests, utilizing 2- and 8-mg dexamethasone doses. CT scan of the abdomen: a 3-cm tumor in left adrenal gland.
With proper preoperative preparation, left adrenal gland was removed by open flank incision.
Glucocorticoid replacement, followed by tapering doses over 6 months, resulted in complete resolu- tion of the hyperadrenal state.
Diagnosis: Cushing’s syndrome due to adrenocorti- cal tumor.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person after resolution of clinical symptoms and signs.
Comment: Since the surgical cure rate for adrenal adenoma is virtually 100%, this individual should be considered cured.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-22
0% to 14% Impairment Due to Hyperadrenocorticism


Subject: 21-year-old woman.
History: Unremarkable past medical history.
Current Symptoms: Since puberty, at age 13, per- sistent acne and progressive hirsutism, with irreg- ular menstrual cyclicity. Feels self-conscious and depressed regarding her physical appearance and has difficulty socializing.
Physical Exam: BP: 120/80 mm Hg; PR: 80 BPM. Height: 167.6 cm (5 ft 6 in); weight: 72 kg (160 lb), which is diffusely distributed. Markedly increased dark terminal hairs on lower back, upper chest including periareolar, upper and lower abdomen, and upper thighs; dark vellus hairs on face and lower arms. No striae or purpura. No evi- dence of muscular weakness.


Clinical Studies: Plasma DHEA-S: elevated—108.0 µmol/L (4000 µg/mL); free testosterone: 12.2 pg/mL; normal levels of estradiol, luteinizing hor- mone (LH), and cortisol, which suppresses follow- ing administration of 1 mg of dexamethasone.
Plasma: slightly elevated level (120 µg/dL) of 17?-hydroxyprogesterone had an exaggerated
response (12.0 nmol/L [400 ng/dL]) to administra- tion of cosyntropin. Administration of 12 mg of prednisone every other day has resulted in normal- ization of the biochemical parameters, resolution of the acne, and marked diminution of the hir- sutism, but not complete remission. Menstrual cyclicity returned to normal.
Diagnosis: Adult-onset 21-hydroxylase deficiency.
Impairment Rating: 14% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The hirsutism may never completely resolve, leaving individual’s self-image and abil- ity to socialize in a compromised state. Assess severity in chapter on mental and behavioral disorders (Chapter 14).
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-23
15% to 39% Impairment Due to Hyperadrenocorticism
Subject: 56-year-old woman.
History: 10-year history of worsening bronchial asthma with diminishing responsiveness to bron- chodilators and requiring 15 to 20 mg of pred- nisone daily for the past year.
Current Symptoms: 6.75-kg (15-lb) weight gain and dependent edema over the past year. Facial acne, easy bruising, recurrent vaginal candidiasis, and acute low back pain, which has been persist- ent for the past month.
Physical Exam: Cushingoid body habitus, several ecchymotic areas over distal upper extremities, tinea versicolor on chest, tenderness over the L4 vertebra with bilateral paralumbar muscle spasm. “Cheesy” vaginal discharge, suggestive of monil- ial infection.
Clinical Studies: Vaginal discharge containing heavy growth of Candida albicans. Lumbar x-ray reveals marked osteoporosis and compression fracture of the L2 vertebra.

Diagnosis: Iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment due to Cushing’s syndrome; combine with appropriate ratings for vertebral collapse, pulmonary impair- ment, and any permanent gynocologic impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Individual is subject to further impair- ment from hypercortisolism if glucocorticoid can- not be discontinued or, at least, diminished.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-24
15% to 39% Impairment Due to Hyperadrenocorticism


Subject: 54-year-old man.
History: Transsphenoidal microadenomectomy 2 years ago as treatment for Cushing’s disease.
Current Symptoms: Past 6 months, 9.0-kg (20-lb) weight gain, acne, ankle edema, proximal muscle weakness, and generalized fatigue.
Physical Exam: BP: 150/100 mm Hg; PR: 84 BPM. Central obesity with rounded plethoric facies; red striae on abdomen and flanks; prominent proxi- mal muscle weakness.
Clinical Studies: Serum sodium: 148 mmol/L (148 mEq/L); potassium: 2.8 mmol/L (2.8 mEq/L; BUN: 5.0 mmol/L (14 mg/dL). Plasma corti- cotropin (ACTH): elevated—33 pmol/L (150 pg/mL); urinary free cortisol: elevated—828 nmol/d (300 µg/24 h). Plasma cortisol at 8 AM: 552 nmol/L (20 µg/dL); at 4 PM: 607 nmol/L (22 µg/dL). Whereas there was no suppression of plasma cortisol and urinary free cortisol excretion with low-dose dexamethasone, there was adequate suppression with high-dose dexamethasone. MRI of the pituitary failed to reveal the presence of an adenoma, but CT scanning of the abdomen demonstrated bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. The individual was treated with 4500 rad of conven- tional megavoltage radiation to the pituitary gland, in addition to 4 g of mitotane daily and prednisone as replacement therapy.
Diagnosis: Recurrent Cushing’s disease.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person.


Comment: Radiation therapy was used to spare the individual a surgical procedure and the possibility of developing Nelson’s syndrome. Mitotane, as an adrenolytic agent, was used to achieve immediate control of the hypercortisolism since it may take up to 18 months to achieve maximum benefit from the radiation. Common complaints with the use of mitotane are nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. If signs and symptoms resolve, impair- ment rating may decrease.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-25
90% Impairment Due to Hyperadrenocorticism

Subject: 62-year-old man.
History: 15 months postoperative for adrenal carci- noma.
Current Symptoms: Marked fatigue and weakness, with recurrence of weight gain and edema.
Physical Exam: BP: 170/110 mm Hg; PR: 84 BPM. Facial plethora and acne; central obesity, 2+ bilat- eral lower extremity edema; palpable mass in left lateral portion of the abdomen.
Clinical Studies: Urinary free cortisol: elevated— 635 nmol/d (230 µg/24 h); 17-ketosteroid (17- KS): markedly elevated—62 mg/24 h. Serum sodium: 146 mmol/L (146 mEq/L); potassium:
2.6 mmol/L (2.6 mEq/L). MRI: a large adrenal mass extending into the surrounding tissue, con- sistent with adrenal carcinoma.
Diagnosis: Recurrent infiltrative adrenal carcinoma.
Impairment Rating: 90% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Although the individual was treated with mitotane to control the symptoms of hyperadrena- lism, the disease is progressive with a survival expectancy of no more than 6 months.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-26
90% Impairment Due to Hyperadrenocorticism

Subject: 74-year-old man.
History: 18 months postoperative for adrenal carci- noma.
Current Symptoms: Marked fatigue and weakness, weight gain, edema, chest pain, and shortness of breath; uncomfortable with minimal exertion or self-care activities.

Physical Exam: BP: 160/100 mm Hg; PR: 80 BPM. Facial plethora and acne; central obesity, 3+ bilat- eral lower extremity edema; palpable mass in left lateral portion of the abdomen; left pleural effusion.
Clinical Studies: Urinary free cortisol: elevated—828 nmol/d (300 µg/24 h); 17-KS: markedly elevated— 70 mg/24 h. Serum sodium: 148 mmol/L (148
mEq/L); potassium: 2.6 mmol/L (2.6 mEq/L). Chest x-ray: a large mass in left lower lung field and a large pleural effusion. MRI of the abdomen: a large adrenal mass extending into the surrounding tissue, consistent with adrenal carcinoma.
Diagnosis: Adrenal carcinoma, recurrent and metastatic to lung.
Impairment Rating: 95% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Although mitotane may control the symptoms of hyperadrenalism, the disease is pro- gressive with a survival expectancy of no more than 6 months. Combine this impairment with that of lung impairment due to metastatic cancer.
---END EXAMPLE---

10.6  Adrenal Medulla
10.6 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
The adrenal medulla synthesizes and secretes prima- rily epinephrine, which functions in the regulation of blood pressure and cardiac output and, to some extent, affects the intermediary metabolism of the body. The adrenal medulla is usually not essential to the maintenance of life or well-being. Its absence may constitute a permanent impairment rating if an abnormality is detected in the individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living, especially in the response to stress. Hyperfunction of the adrenal medulla may be caused by pheochromocytomas or, rarely, by hyperplasia of the chromaffin cells.
Pheochromocytomas may arise at any site in the body that has sympathetic nervous tissue. The pres- ence of a pheochromocytoma is usually associated with paroxysmal or sustained hypertension and may produce manifestations of coronary artery disease. Pheochromocytomas may be multiple in an individ- ual and may occur in families in association with medullary carcinoma of the thyroid and hyperplasia of the parathyroids; this constitutes the syndrome of multiple endocrine neoplasia. Approximately 10% of pheochromocytomas are malignant.


10.6 b Description of Clinical Studies
These techniques include (1) measurement of unme- tabolized urinary catecholamines, including total cat- echolamines, epinephrine, and norepinephrine, and of their degradation products in urine, vanillylman- delic acid, and metanephrines; (2) measurement of the plasma catecholamines, epinephrine, norepineph- rine, and dopamine; (3) suppressive response of cate- cholamines to oral clonidine; (4) radiography of the adrenals by CT scanning and MRI; and (5) nucleotide scanning with 123I/ 131I-metaiodobenzyl- guanidine (MIBG).


10.6 c Criteria for Evaluating Permanent Impairment Due to Adrenal Medulla Disease
Permanent impairment related to a pheochromocy- toma may be classified by means of Table 10-7.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-27
0% to 14% Impairment Due to Pheochromocytoma

Subject: 42-year-old man.
History: 1-year history of high blood pressure, inad- equately controlled by various antihypertensive medications.
Current Symptoms: Episodes consisting of headache, palpitations, diaphoresis, and a feeling of apprehension, lasting for up to several hours and occurring from zero to three times per day.
Physical Exam: BP: 130/85 mm Hg (170/110 mm Hg during an episode); PR: 76 BPM (112 PBM during an episode).

Clinical Studies: 24-hour urine specimen: contained large amounts of vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) and free catecholamines, 101 µmol/d (20 mg/24 h) and 350 µg/24 h, respectively. Plasma concentra- tion of catecholamines: elevated—5 pg/mL, did not suppress following oral ingestion of 0.3 mg of clonidine. CT scan: a 3-cm tumor in left adrenal gland, which, after proper preoperative prepara- tion, was successfully removed.
Diagnosis: Intra-adrenal pheochromocytoma.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Subsequent to surgery, all blood pressure readings were normal. With the complete removal of the tumor and with no further symptoms or blood pressure elevation, the individual is consid- ered cured.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-28
15% to 29% Impairment Due to Pheochromocytoma


Subject: 64-year-old man.
History: Progressively worsening hypertension, poorly responsive to various antihypertensive medications.
Current Symptoms: At least three episodes per day consisting of throbbing headache, palpitations, nausea, diaphoresis, tremulousness, and weak- ness; occasionally associated with chest pain.
Physical Exam: BP: 170/120 mm Hg, PR: 108 BPM (supine position); BP: 150/105 mm Hg, PR: 120 BPM (erect position).
Clinical Studies: 24-hour urine specimen: contained large amounts of VMA and free catecholamines, 151 µmol/d (30 mg/24 h) and 450 µg, respec- tively. Plasma concentration of catecholamines: elevated—8 pg/mL, did not suppress following oral ingestion of 0.3 mg of clonidine. CT scan: a large tumor in left adrenal gland and extending into the retroperitoneum. Hypertension and symp- toms were well controlled with use of 20 mg of phenoxybenzamine twice a day and 50 mg of metoprolol twice a day.
Diagnosis: Malignant pheochromocytoma.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: As the disease progresses, symptoms and elevated blood pressure may recur, with the indi- vidual requiring larger doses of medication and experiencing a greater percentage of impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-29
30% to 90% Impairment Due to Pheochromocytoma
Subject: Same as in Example 10-28, 2 years later.
History: Despite continued use of medication, dur- ing the past 3 months individual has had rising blood pressure and progressively worsening episodes.
Current Symptoms: Episodes consist of throbbing headaches, palpitations, nausea, diaphoresis, tremulousness, weakness, and chest pain. Unable to perform most activities of daily living.
Physical Exam: BP: 195/130 mm Hg; PR: 100 BPM.
Clinical Studies: 24-hour urine specimen: contained 202 µmol/d (40 mg/24 h) of VMA and 620 µg/24 h of free catecholamines. CT scan: further peritoneal extension of left adrenal gland tumor. 131I-MIBG scan: skeletal metastases. With 100 mg of phe- noxybenzamine twice a day and 100 mg of meto- prolol twice a day, blood pressure was controlled only to 160/95 mm Hg, with continuation of symp- tomatic episodes, although milder in severity.
Diagnosis: Metastatic pheochromocytoma, inade- quately controlled by medical therapy.
Impairment Rating: 90% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Very poor prognosis.
---END EXAMPLE---

10.7 Pancreas (Islets
	of Langerhans)
Insulin and glucagon are among the hormones secreted by the islets of Langerhans. Both hormones are required for the maintenance of normal metabo- lism of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins.
Permanent impairment may result from a deficiency or an excess of either hormone. Removal of normal pancreatic tissue during the resection of an islet cell neoplasm does not constitute an endocrine impair- ment if, after the operation, the individual’s carbohy- drate tolerance is normal.
10.7
a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Abnormalities of islet cell function may be mani- fested by high plasma glucose levels, as in diabetes mellitus, or by low plasma glucose levels, as in hypoglycemia. Diabetes mellitus is classified into two main groups: type 1 diabetes and type 2 dia- betes. The complications of diabetes mellitus fall into two general categories: (1) those that are directly related to the degree of hyperglycemia and (2) the chronic complications resulting from inadequate control of hyperglycemia and lipid metabolism over many years.

People with type 1, if untreated, will develop severe hyperglycemia and ketonemia, resulting in dehydra- tion, weight loss, and severe weakness, ultimately progressing into stupor, coma, and then death. This type of diabetes mellitus usually begins in young persons, but it may occur at any age.

People with type 2 generally are over 40 years old and overweight. In the early years of this disease, these people do not develop severe hyperglycemia and its associated symptoms and, indeed, may not experience any symptoms of the disease. In later years, when insulin production falls significantly, the hyperglycemic symptoms become more evident.

The main chronic complications of diabetes mellitus and associated impairments are (1) retinopathy, caus- ing visual impairment; (2) nephropathy, causing renal impairment; (3) neuropathy, causing various neuropathic impairments; and (4) atherosclerosis, causing atherosclerotic heart disease, as well as cere- brovascular and peripheral vascular disease.

Hypoglycemia occasionally causes impairment. It may result from excessive insulin that either is pro- duced endogenously or administered by injection. Hypoglycemia may be manifested by weakness, sweating, tachycardia, headache, confusion, muscu- lar incoordination, blurred vision, loss of conscious- ness, and convulsions. Prolonged hypoglycemia or repeated severe attacks of hypoglycemia may lead to mental deterioration and brain damage.


10.7 b Diabetes Mellitus
Description of Clinical Studies
These techniques include, but are not limited to (1) determination of fasting and postprandial plasma glucose levels; (2) determination of hemoglobin A1c level; (3) measurements of levels of triglycerides, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, and other lipids; (4) electrocardiogram or cardiac stress testing;
(5) ophthalmologic examination; (6) tests of renal function, including measurement of serum creatinine and urinary protein excretion; (7) Doppler testing of the peripheral circulation; (8) roentgenograms of the chest, gastrointestinal tract, pelvis, or extremities, including arteriograms; and (9) neurologic testing.

Although it may be useful to examine the results from blood glucose testing done by the individual at home in order to obtain an additional measure of the degree of glucose control, one must recognize that these measurements may be less objective than laboratory methods such as self-hemoglobin A1c measurement.

Much of the impairment that results from diabetes is related to the chronic complications. Therefore, the examiner must not only determine the presence or absence of retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy, but also evaluate the other systems that may be involved. Impairments of other systems would be expressed as whole person impairments and then combined with an impairment percent resulting from instability of glucose control by means of the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).


Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Diabetes Mellitus
Permanent impairment from diabetes mellitus can be rated using the criteria given in Table 10-8.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-30
0% to 5% Impairment Due to Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus

Subject: 40-year-old man.
History: Diabetes discovered on a routine medical examination.
Current Symptoms: Feels well; lost 2.25 kg (5 lb) within the last year. Able to perform all desired activities.
Physical Exam: Moderately obese. Retinal examina- tion showed no diabetic retinopathy. Remainder of exam: normal.
Clinical Studies: Medical examinations during a 2-year period disclosed 1+ glucosuria. Fasting
plasma glucose level: 8.9 mmol/L (160 mg/dL) on two occasions; no albumin in the urine. After 3 months on a special diet, weight: normal; fasting plasma glucose level: 6.1 mmol/L (110 mg/dL).
Diagnosis: Type 2 diabetes mellitus controlled by diet, without evidence of microangiopathy.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Impairment would increase if manifesta- tions of diabetes develop over time.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-31
0% to 5% Impairment Due to Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus


Subject: 45-year-old woman.
History: Repeated Candida infections during the past year.
Current Symptoms: Easily fatigued; polyuria; poly- dipsia. No impairment of vision.
Physical Exam: Obese; retinal microaneurysms and “dot and blot” hemorrhages.
Clinical Studies: Fasting plasma glucose level: ele- vated on initial evaluation. No impairment of vision.
Diagnosis: Type 2 diabetes mellitus with early dia- betic retinopathy.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Evaluate control of diabetes after diet; regular ophthalmologic evaluations.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-32
0% to 5% Impairment Due to Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus


Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Several-year history of signs and symptoms of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Current Symptoms: Feels less fatigued when glu- cose level is lower and when following diet.
Physical Exam: No retinopathy or proteinuria. Although he lost weight on a prescribed diet, plasma glucose level could not be maintained within normal limits on that diet. When on a restricted diet and taking an oral agent, fasting serum glucose level was 6.7 mmol/L (120 mg/dL) and hemoglobin A1c was 0.07 proportion of total hemoglobin (7.5% of total hemoglobin); normal =
0.06 proportion of total hemoglobin (6.3% of total hemoglobin).
Diagnosis: Type 2 diabetes mellitus, reasonably well controlled by diet and oral agent.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-33
6% to 10% Impairment Due to Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus

Subject: 50-year-old man.
History: Type 2 diabetes mellitus for 5 years. At onset, had a fasting plasma glucose level of 10.5 mmol/L (190 mg/dL) when on a restricted diet and taking an oral hypoglycemic agent. Right leg was amputated above the knee because of gan- grene of the foot due to severe peripheral vascular disease 4 years ago.
Current Symptoms: Adheres to prescribed diet and takes 16 U of isophane (NPH) insulin daily. No symptoms; no glucosuria or acetonuria.
Physical Exam: Right knee amputee; decreased sen- sation in stocking-glove distribution over left lower extremity.
Clinical Studies: On this regimen, fasting plasma glucose level: 6.9 to 7.8 mmol/L (125 to 140 mg/dL); hemoglobin A1c: 0.09 proportion of total hemoglobin (8.9% of total hemoglobin).
Diagnosis: Type 2 diabetes with complications, requiring insulin to control hyperglycemia. Plasma glucose level is fairly well controlled by diet and one daily injection of insulin.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment due to type 2 diabetes mellitus; combine with impairment due to midthigh amputation above the knee joint to give impairment of the whole person (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Subsequent complications likely; impair- ment will need to be reassessed.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-34
11% to 20% Impairment Due to Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus


Subject: 33-year-old woman.
History: Type 1 diabetes mellitus for 5 years.
Originally presented with polyuria, polydipsia, and weight loss, in addition to a plasma glucose level of 22.2 mmol/L (400 mg/dL) and marked ketonuria. Condition was satisfactorily controlled with a prescribed diet and an injection of insulin before both breakfast and dinner. Meals and insulin had to be taken at prescribed times to maintain adequate glycemic control.
Current Symptoms: Cheesy vaginal discharge; pru- ritus; occurs every few months.
Physical Exam: No evidence of microangiopathy; vaginal candidiasis.
Clinical Studies: Fasting glucose: 8.9 mmol/L (160 mg/dL).
Diagnosis: Type 1 diabetes mellitus, vaginal candidi- asis satisfactorily controlled by insulin and diet.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Aim for improved control.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-35
11% to 20% Impairment Due to Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
Subject: 40-year-old woman.
History: Onset of type 1 diabetes mellitus 20 years earlier. Originally presented with polydipsia, polyuria, weight loss, and a plasma glucose level of 19.4 mmol/L (350 mg/dL).
Current Symptoms: Occasional visual changes with floaters, flashes, and decreased visual acuity.
Physical Exam: Ophthalmologic examination dis- closes background retinopathy.
Clinical Studies: Hemoglobin A1c: 0.10 proportion of total hemoglobin (10.5% of total hemoglobin).
Diagnosis: Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic microangiopathy.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Referral to ophthalmologist for regular assessments; combine any visual impairment (see Chapter 12 and Combined Values Chart, p. 604) with endocrine impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-36
11% to 20% Impairment Due to Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
Subject: 45-year-old man.
History: Type 1 diabetes mellitus for 25 years.
Plasma glucose level was controlled by a mixture of isophane (NPH) and regular insulin, given twice daily: 12 U before breakfast and 6 U before dinner.
Current Symptoms: Blurred vision; decreased acuity.
Physical Exam: Proliferative retinopathy.
Clinical Studies: Creatinine level: elevated; dimin- ished creatinine clearance (see Chapter 7, The Urinary and Reproductive Systems).
Diagnosis: Type 1 diabetes mellitus with complica- tions; plasma glucose level is satisfactorily con- trolled by diet and insulin.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment due to dia- betes mellitus; combine with ratings for the visual and urinary system impairments (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Monitor for progressive renal and visual impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-37
21% to 40% Impairment Due to Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus


Subject: 24-year-old man.
History: Labile type 1 (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus for 10 years. Ability to perform physical activities varied greatly from day to day. Despite adherence to a prescribed diet that included between-meal and bedtime snacks and a carefully planned insulin program with both premeal and bedtime injections, results of home plasma glu- cose tests varied greatly. Severe hypoglycemic reactions occurred without warning.
Current Symptoms: Intermittent fatigue; episodes of hypoglycemia and severe hypoglycemic reac- tions.
Physical Exam: 10% underweight. Hemoglobin A1c: elevated.
Clinical Studies: No clinical or laboratory evidence of complications.
Diagnosis: Type 1 diabetes mellitus, not adequately controlled by diet and insulin.
Impairment Rating: 35% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Monitor for complications.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-38
21% to 40% Impairment Due to Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus


Subject: 35-year-old woman.
History: Poorly controlled type 1 diabetes mellitus for 15 years. Took injections of 30 U of isophane (NPH) insulin before breakfast and 10 U of iso- phane (NPH) insulin before dinner.
Current Symptoms: Severe hypoglycemic reactions occur unpredictably several times each week.
Fatigues easily and complains of burning foot pain and difficulty walking.
Physical Exam: Malnourished on a 12 552-kJ
(3000-kcal) diet. Vibratory sensation and deep ten- don reflexes absent below the knees. Examination of the fundi disclosed numerous microaneurysms, but there was no visual impairment.


Clinical Studies: Fasting plasma glucose level:
>11.1 mmol/L (>200 mg/dL).
Diagnosis: Type 1 (insulin-dependent) diabetes mel- litus with complications, not adequately con- trolled by diet and insulin.
Impairment Rating: 40% impairment due to dia- betes mellitus; combine with impairment due to peripheral neuropathy to determine impairment of the whole person (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).


10.7 c Hypoglycemia
Description of Clinical Studies
Distinction must be made between the presence of postprandial and postabsorptive hypoglycemia, since postabsorptive hypoglycemia suggests the possibility of a severe or even fatal disorder, whereas postpran- dial hypoglycemia is usually self-limited and rarely produces physical impairment.

The techniques used include, but are not limited to
(1) measurement of plasma glucose and insulin or C- peptide after overnight or longer periods of fasting, on several occasions; (2) roentgenograms of the skull and chest and CT scan or MRI of the upper abdomen; (3) tests of liver function; and (4) tests of adrenocortical and pituitary gland function. Documented hypoglycemia requires a detailed med- ical evaluation to determine the specific cause.


Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Hypoglycemia
The criteria for rating permanent impairment due to hypoglycemia are given in Table 10-9.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-39
0% to 5% Impairment Due to Postprandial Hypoglycemia


Subject: 23-year-old woman.
History: Unremarkable medical history with no family history of diabetes mellitus; no excessive use of ethanol.
Current Symptoms: For past 2 to 3 months, several episodes per week consisting of lightheadedness, tachycardia, anxiety, hunger, and diaphoresis, which resolve 10 to 20 minutes after eating; typi- cally occur 3 to 4 hours following a meal.
Physical Exam: Unremarkable.
Clinical Studies: 5-hour oral glucose tolerance test with 100 g of glucose: glucose concentration nadir of 2.5 mmol/L (46 mg/dL) at the 4th hour; was associated with the above-described symp- toms. Thyrotropin (TSH), sodium, potassium, ala- nine aminotransferase (ALT), and alkaline phosphatase: normal.
Diagnosis: Postprandial (reactive) hypoglycemia. Diet consisting of limited quantities of refined carbohydrate and ingestion of snacks between meals and at bedtime resulted in abatement of symptomatic episodes.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: With proper diet, there should be mini- mal impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example10-40
0% to 5% Impairment Due to Hypoglycemia

Subject: 45-year-old man.
History: Bad temper upon arising; outlook improved after breakfast. Did not use alcohol or tobacco.
Late one morning while at work, suddenly became agitated and lost consciousness. On emer- gency admission to a hospital, plasma glucose level was 1.1 mmol/L (20 mg/dL). Remained weak and irritable before breakfast, despite a high carbohydrate intake that included a large feeding at bedtime.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic.
Physical Exam: Abdominal examination: normal.
Clinical Studies: Fasting plasma glucose level: never exceeded 1.9 mmol/L (35 mg/dL).
Plasma insulin, C-peptide, and proinsulin levels: elevated during hypoglycemic episodes. Chest roentgenogram: no abnormalities. Pituitary, adrenal, and liver functions: normal. A small, benign insulinoma was excised from the head of the pancreas.
Diagnosis: Benign functioning islet cell adenoma (insulinoma), with remission after excision.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: After a 3-month recovery period, individ- ual remained without symptoms.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-41
6% to 50% Impairment Due to Hypoglycemia


Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Alarming personality changes during a period of a few weeks; had a seizure. A diagnosis of insulinoma was made. Experienced no impair- ment of hepatic function, and recovery from sur- gery was uneventful except for persistence of mild fasting hypoglycemia. Hypoglycemia responded well to frequent feedings of a high-protein,
high-carbohydrate diet and 40 mg of prednisone, taken daily. Still had occasional transient mental lapses 10 months after returning to work, during one of which the plasma glucose level was 1.5 mmol/L (28 mg/dL). When daily dosage of pred- nisone was increased to 60 mg, symptomatic hypoglycemia improved, but manifestations of Cushing’s syndrome became more prominent.
Curent Symptoms: Episodes of irritability; light- headedness; anxiety; diaphoresis.
Physical Exam: Physical central obesity; mild facial acne; 1+ bipedal edema; firm, palpable right upper quadrant mass.
Clinical Studies: Laparotomy: a large islet cell ade- nocarcinoma in the tail of the pancreas, with metastases in the liver. The spleen and the main tumor mass were resected.
Diagnosis: Metastatic islet cell adenocarcinoma with incomplete control of symptoms.
Impairment Rating: 50% impairment due to pan- creatic malignant neoplasm and hypoglycemia and 10% impairment due to steroid-induced Cushing’s syndrome; because they involve differ- ent parts of the endocrine system, combine to give 55% impairment of the whole person (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Poor prognosis; impairment will likely increase.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-42
6% to 50% Impairment Due to Hypoglycemia
Subject: 52-year-old man.
History: 38-year history of type 1 diabetes mellitus with nonproliferative retinopathy, albuminuria, distal symmetric polyneuropathy, and autonomic neuropathy, including gastroparesis and hypo- glycemic unawareness. Without prior warning symptoms, has had many severe hypoglycemic episodes, one leading to an auto accident.
Current Symptoms: Easily fatigued; numbness of both lower extremities from toes to knees; peri- odic postprandial abdominal bloating and vomit- ing.
Physical Exam: BP: 150/95 mm Hg; PR: 84 BPM. Decreased sensory and vibratory perception below the knees, bilaterally.
Clinical Studies: Hemoglobin A1c: 0.98 proportion of total hemoglobin (9.8% of total hemoglobin); fasting blood glucose: 18.2 mmol/L (328 mg/dL). Upper gastrointestinal radiographic study: pro- longed gastric emptying.
Diagnosis: Type 1 diabetes mellitus with gastropare- sis diabeticorum and hypoglycemic unawareness.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment due to hypo- glycemia; combine with rating from gastroparesis and peripheral neuropathy to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Treatment with metoclopramide resulted in limited success with the symptoms of gastro- paresis with continued hypoglycemic events.
10.8
 Gonads
In addition to producing sex hormones that affect male and female physical and sexual development and behavior, the gonads produce either spermatozoa or ova. The major hormone of the testes is testos- terone, whereas those of the ovaries are estrogen
and progesterone. Dysfunction of the gonads can be caused by tumors, trauma, infection, chemotherapy, irradiation, autoimmune disease, abnormal XY chromatin, and surgical removal. Gonadal function may also vary with disorders of the pituitary- hypothalamic axis.
---END EXAMPLE---

10.8 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Precocious puberty in boys is accompanied by early and rapid somatic development and an increased rate of skeletal maturation and height velocity, but, para- doxically, it results in short adult height. It may result from various central nervous system disorders, adrenal enzyme defects, virilizing tumors, or—occa- sionally—as a familial condition.

Precocious puberty in girls may also be caused by various central nervous system disorders, as well as by ovarian and adrenal tumors. Often, a cause is not identified. As in boys, precocious puberty in girls results in early and rapid somatic development and an increased rate of skeletal maturation and height velocity, with ultimately short adult height. Some ovarian tumors may cause masculinization.

Some adrenal enzyme defects and neoplasms, as well as some gonadal neoplasms, may produce con- trasexual precocity. Certain ovarian conditions pro- duce irregular menstrual periods with heavy bleeding and anemia. Polycystic ovarian syndrome and sev- eral types of ovarian neoplasms may produce severe hirsutism and virilization, in addition to anovulation.

Testicular hypofunction that occurs before adoles- cence results in eunuchoidism, which is accompa- nied by diminished sexual function, infertility, and failure to develop or maintain secondary sexual char- acteristics. Growth of the body extends beyond the usual age because of delayed epiphyseal closure.
Individuals with this condition usually lack endurance and strength. Testicular hypofunction that occurs in adulthood results in varying degrees of regression of secondary sexual characteristics, sexual function, strength, and endurance, and it may also be accompanied by infertility.


Ovarian hypofunction, with onset before adoles- cence, may be characterized by primary amenorrhea, anovulation, poor development of secondary sexual characteristics, and growth beyond the usual age because of delayed maturation of the skeleton.
Menopause is a natural occurrence in older women, but it also may follow surgical removal of the ovaries. It may be accompanied by such symptoms as hot flashes, irritability, fatigue, and headaches. If not treated, osteoporosis and an enhancement of ath- erosclerosis may occur during later years.


10.8 b Description of Clinical Studies
These techniques include, but are not limited to
(1) measurements of plasma gonadotropins, pro- lactin, testosterone, estrogen, progesterone, DHEA- S, androstenedione, and occasionally 17-ketosteroids in the urine; (2) radiographic determinations of skeletal age in children and adolescents; (3) CT scans or MRI to evaluate the pituitary, adrenals, and ovaries; (4) sex chromatin and chromosome studies;
(5) testicular biopsy; (6) semen analysis; (7) vaginal cytologic examination; (8) culdoscopy or laparoscopy; (9) endometrial biopsy; (10) ovarian biopsy; and (11) pelvic ultrasound in women.


10.8 c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Disorders of the Gonads
An individual with anatomic loss or alteration of the gonads that results in an absence, or an abnormally high level, of gonadal hormones would have 0% to 35% impairment of the whole person, as detailed in Chapter 7, The Urinary and Reproductive Systems. Impairment resulting from inability to reproduce, and other impairments associated with gonadal dys- function, should be evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in Chapter 7.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-43
10% Impairment Due to Hypogonadism


Subject: 31-year-old man.
History: Lack of sexual development and function, high-pitched voice, and no growth of beard. Tall, with relatively long arms and legs. Responded well to continuous treatment with testosterone. Penis became larger, and there was adequate sex- ual functioning; increase in body and facial hair; voice became deeper.
Current Symptoms: Embarrassed about limited sexual development; socially isolated.
Physical Exam: Penis was tiny; scrotum and testes were small.
Clinical Studies: Bone age: 18 years. Plasma testos- terone level: 2.4 nmol/L (70 ng/mL); plasma gonadotropin level: low.
Diagnosis: Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: If social isolation doesn’t improve, psy- chiatric evaluation appropriate.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-44
30% Impairment Due to Turner Syndrome

Subject: 19-year-old woman.
History: Has been one the shortest in height among her peers since childhood. Primary amenorrhea without breast development.
Current Symptoms: Failure to grow to anticipated height and absence of menstrual periods.
Physical Exam: Height: 1680 cm (4 ft 8 in); sparse pubic and axillary hair; Tanner 1 breast develop- ment; bilateral short fourth metacarpals; short, webbed neck.
Clinical Studies: Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH): 84 IU/L (84 mIU/mL); 45,XO karyotype; renal ultrasound echocardiogram and TSH: nor- mal. Treated with replacement doses of estrogen and progesterone, inducing development of sec- ondary sexual characteristics and menses.
Diagnosis: Gonadal dysgenesis (Turner syndrome).
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment due to gonadal loss and inability to reproduce as set forth in Chapter 7, The Urinary and Reproductive Systems; combine with any mental and behavioral impairment (see Chapter 14 and the Combined Values chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment.
Comment: Monitor for continued sexual development.
10.9
 Mammary Glands
The mammary glands make, store, and secrete milk. Absence of the mammary glands does not cause impairment of the whole person in males, but in females it will prevent nursing. In some endocrine disorders, there may be galactorrhea in females and gynecomastia in males. Gynecomastia in males may be accompanied by galactorrhea.
---END EXAMPLE---

10.9 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Mammary Gland Disorders
A female of childbearing age with absence of the breasts, an individual with galactorrhea sufficient to require the use of absorbent pads, and a male with painful gynecomastia that interferes with perform- ance of activities of daily living each would have 0% to 5% impairment of the whole person. If there were a coexisting psychiatric impairment, the whole per- son impairment would be greater (see Chapter 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders).

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-45
5% Impairment Due to Microadenoma of the Pituitary


Subject: 32-year-old woman.
History: 1-year history of prolactin-producing microadenoma of the pituitary; using no medica- tions.
Current Symptoms: Irregular menstrual cyclicity and profuse galactorrhea, sufficient to require the use of absorbent pads. Both bromocriptine and cabergoline cause nausea, precluding use of either drug.
Physical Exam: Easily expressible milky breast dis- charge; thyroid normal to palpation.
Clinical Studies: Serum prolactin: 120 µg/L
(120 ng/mL); TSH: 1.2 µIU/L (1.2 µU/mL); BUN:
5.7 mmol/L (16 mg/dL); alkaline phosphatase: 35 IU/L.
Diagnosis: Prolactin-producing microadenoma of the pituitary.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Impairment results from the persistent embarrassment of galactorrhea and alteration of some activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---

10.10 Metabolic Bone
	Disease
Metabolic bone disease usually does not result in impairment unless there is fracture, pain, deformity, or peripheral nerve entrapment. Hyperparathyroidism, hypogonadism, glucocorticoid excess, hyperthy- roidism, nutritional deficiencies, and certain drugs may cause osteoporosis, which is reversible with treat- ment, and are discussed elsewhere, as are multiple myeloma and other malignancies. The treatment of renal osteodystrophy may be highly successful, but even after renal transplantation, bone disease may per- sist. In order to prevent progressive skeletal deteriora- tion, continuous treatment may be required for primary osteoporosis, hypogonadism, Paget’s disease, and vitamin D-resistant osteomalacia. Permanent deformity may result from rickets, osteoporotic frac- tures, and osteogenesis imperfecta.


10.10 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Metabolic bone disease is usually asymptomatic unless complications occur, such as fractures, accompanied by pain.


10.10b Description of Clinical Studies These include, but are not limited to (1) dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA); (2) biochemical markers such as alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin, and collagen cross-links; (3) urinary calcium excre- tion; (4) radiographs and bone scans; and (5) bone biopsy.
10.10
c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Metabolic Bone Disease
Unless accompanied by pain, skeletal deformity, or peripheral nerve involvement, 0% impairment exists since activities of daily living are not affected. When continuous hormone and mineral therapy gives com- plete relief of symptoms, impairment of the whole person may be considered to be 0% to 3%. When continuous therapy is required to relieve pain and the activities of daily living are restricted, the estimate should be 5% to 15% impairment of the whole person.

Impairment from fracture, spinal collapse, or other complications of metabolic bone disease is discussed in the chapters on the musculoskeletal system (Chapters 15-17) and pain (Chapter 18). In general, the impairment percents shown in the Guides chap- ters make allowance for the pain that may accom- pany the impairing conditions. Any associated loss of motion should be evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in the chapters on the musculoskele- tal system.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-46
0% to 3% Impairment Due to Metabolic Bone Disease

Subject: 62-year-old woman.
History: 20 years postmenopausal; never used hor- mone replacement therapy due to strong family history of breast malignancy.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic.
Physical Exam: Unremarkable.
Clinical Studies: Bone density by DEXA: lumbar T score of -2.32 SD; hip -2.64 SD. TSH, parathyroid hormone (PTH), complete blood count, BUN, AM and PM cortisol, and urinary excretion of calcium: normal. Treatment was initiated with 10 mg of alendronate daily.
Diagnosis: Osteoporosis secondary to hypogo- nadism.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Bone density should improve and risk of fracture decrease with continued use of alen- dronate.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 10-47
5% to 15% Impairment Due to Metabolic Bone Disease


Subject: 68-year-old woman.
History: Considerable local pain with motion of the back and spine, along with some generalized backache and spasm related to partial collapse of T4 and T12. Pain persisted despite prolonged therapy with anabolic agents, estrogens, vitamin D, and calcium.
Current Symptoms: Pain that limits the ability to do activities of daily living.
Physical Exam: Scoliosis; stooped posture; arthritic and slow gait.
Clinical Studies: Severe osteoporosis of the axial skeleton and, to a lesser extent, of the extremities.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment due to meta- bolic bone disease; combine with the estimated rating for musculoskeletal system impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine whole person impairment.


10.11 Endocrine System Impairment Evaluation
	Summary
See Table 10-10 for an evaluation summary for the assessment of endocrine system impairment.


Bibliography
1. Wilson JD, Foster DW, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 9th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1985.
2. Felig P, Baxter J, Broadus A, Frohman L. Endocrinology and Metabolism. 2nd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Book Co; 1987.
3. Marble A, Krall LP, Bradley RF, Christlieb AR, Soeldner JS, eds. Joslin’s Diabetes Mellitus. 12th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Lea & Febiger; 1985.
4. 	Levin ME, O’Neal LW, eds. The Diabetic Foot. 3rd ed. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1983.
5. 	Davidson JK, ed. Clinical Diabetes Mellitus: A Problem-Oriented Approach. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Thieme Medical Publishers; 1991.
6. Braverman LE, Utiger RD, eds. Werner and Ingbar’s The Thyroid. 6th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: JB Lippincott Co; 1991.


7. Burger HG, McLachlan RI, eds. Gonadal Disorders. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; December 1998.
8. Service JF, McMahon MM, O’Brien PC, Ballard DJ. Functioning insulinoma—incidence, recurrence and long-term survival of patients: a 60-year study. Mayo Clin Proc. 1991;66:711-719.
9. Orth DN. Cushing’s syndrome: review article. N Engl J Med. 1995;332:791-803.
10. Bravo EL. Evolving concepts in the pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment of pheochromocytoma. Endocrinol Rev. 1994;15:356-367.
11. Silverberg SJ, Bilezikian JP. Evaluation and manage- ment of primary hyperparathyroidism. J Clin Endocr Metab. 1996;81:2036-2040.
12. Watts NB, ed. Osteoporosis. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; June 1998;419-439.



================================================================================
Chapter 11: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Ear, Nose,  Throat, and Related Structures
11.1 Principles of Assessment
11.2 The Ear
11.3 The Face
11.4 The Nose, Throat, and Related Structures
11.5 Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures Impairment Evaluation Summary
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairments resulting from principal dysfunction of the ear, nose, throat, and related structures. Assess permanent impairment ratings of these structures by evaluating losses in structure or the following functions: hearing; equilibrium; respi- ration; mastication, olfaction, and taste; speech
and voice; and the effect of these losses on the ability to perform activities of daily living. Impairment criteria, listed in earlier editions of the Guides,
were adapted from the American Academy of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery.1 Abbreviations and their definitions are listed in the Glossary.

The following sections have been revised for the fifth edition: a new section has been added on the evaluation of voice impairment, facial disorders and disfigurements have been combined, and case exam- ples have been added to the impairment classes.


245


11.1 Principles of
	Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for per- forming and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluations.

Assistive devices must not be used during the deter- mination of a hearing impairment rating. The use of such devices might give a false impression of a sub- ject’s sensitivity and distort the need to take hearing conservation or other indicated measures. As stated in Chapter 1, report measured hearing with and with- out an assistive device. However, only the measure- ment without the assistive device should be used to determine the impairment rating.


11.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Begin the evaluation with an inquiry into specific symptoms and their severity, duration, and manner of onset. The history, physical examination, and diag- nostic studies may enable identification of the diag- nosis, a management plan, and prognosis. Since the ear, nose, throat, and related structures have distinct functions, disorders of each system will be covered separately in this chapter. Permanent impairments of each system with nonoverlapping functional losses are evaluated separately and then combined.

Some impairment classes refer to limitations in the ability to perform daily activities. When this infor- mation is subjective and possibly misinterpreted, it should not serve as the sole criterion upon which decisions about impairment are made. Rather, obtain objective data about the severity of the findings and the limitations and integrate the findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent impairment.


11.1 b Description of Clinical Studies Multiple and diverse tests are used to investigate the ear, nose, throat, and related structures. Some of these tests are discussed in the relevant organ system section and summarized in Table 11-10.

11.2 The Ear
The ear consists of the auricle, the external canal, the tympanic membrane, the ossicles, the middle ear, the eustachian tube, the mastoid, and the internal ear.
The auditory and vestibular systems include the ear and central nervous system pathways.

The ear provides sensorineural input critical to the senses of hearing and balance. Hearing enables con- tact with environmental cues (eg, those that alert) and enables us to communicate socially. Balance contributes to maintenance of equilibrium in relation to the environment. Balance function is mediated by dynamically monitoring information about the posi- tion of the head, eyes, trunk, and joints at rest and with activity. Although hearing and balance distur- bances can be objectively measured, other condi- tions, such as chronic otorrhea, otalgia, and tinnitus,2 are subjective, should be noted, but cannot be meas- ured independently of the individual’s self-reports.

Permanent hearing impairment is a permanently reduced hearing sensitivity, outside the range of normal for the individual or based on population nor- mal values.3 Hearing should be evaluated after maxi- mum rehabilitation has been achieved and when the impairment is no longer accelerating beyond an age- appropriate rate.4 Evaluate hearing impairment based upon the individual’s binaural hearing, determined from the pure-tone audiogram.


11.2 a Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Hearing Loss
Criteria for evaluating hearing impairment are estab- lished through hearing threshold testing, which serves as the most reproducible of the measures of hearing. Therefore, estimate an impairment percent- age based on the severity of the hearing loss, which accounts for changes in the ability to perform activi- ties of daily living. Tinnitus in the presence of uni- lateral or bilateral hearing impairment may impair speech discrimination. Therefore, add up to 5% for tinnitus in the presence of measurable hearing loss if the tinnitus impacts the ability to perform activities of daily living.


In the calculation of a hearing impairment rating, no correction for presbycusis should be made because:
(1) the method below calculates the degree of hear- ing and assigns a rating, regardless of cause (eg, age, injury, or noise exposure); (2) age correction would result in a reduced binaural impairment score that would thus underestimate the true magnitude of the hearing impairment; and (3) estimation of the rela- tive contributions of various causes of binaural hear- ing impairment is a clinical process (apportionment or allocation) that is separate from the calculation of binaural hearing impairment.

Hearing impairment is measured by evaluating hear- ing in each ear separately and both ears together, based on audiometric measurements. Hearing impairment is reported in each ear separately and both ears together.


Audiometric Measurements to Determine Hearing Impairment
In determining impairments, the following steps should be taken.
1. Test each ear separately with a pure-tone audiometer and record the hearing levels at 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 Hz. It is necessary that the hearing level for each frequency be determined in every subject. The following rules apply for extreme values:
a. If the hearing level at a given frequency is greater than 100 dB or is beyond the range of the audiometer, the level should be taken as 100 dB.
b. If the hearing level for a given frequency has a negative value (eg, –5 dB), the level should be taken as 0 dB.
2. Add the four hearing levels (dB) for each ear sep- arately. Hearing levels are determined according to ANSI Standard S3.6-1996.4
3. Consult Table 11-1 to determine the percentages of monaural hearing impairment for each ear.
4. Consult Table 11-2 to convert the monaural hear- ing impairment percentages to a binaural hearing impairment rating.
5. Consult Table 11-3 to determine the impairment of the whole person.


*Audiometers are calibrated to ANSI Standard S3.6-1996 reference levels.4
†Decibel sum of the hearing threshold levels at 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 Hz.


*The axes are the sum of hearing levels at 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 Hz. The sum for the worse ear is read at the side; the sum for the better ear is read at the bottom. At the intersection of the row for the worse ear and the column for the better ear is the hearing impairment (%).


Evaluation of Monaural Hearing Impairment If the average of the hearing levels at 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 Hz is 25 dB or less, according to 1996 American National Standards Institute (ANSI) audiometric standards,4 no impairment rating is assigned since there is no change in the ability to hear everyday sounds under everyday listening con- ditions (Table 11-1). At the other extreme, if the average of the hearing levels at 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 Hz is more than 91.7 dB, the binaural hearing impairment rating is 100% since the individual has lost the ability to perform an activity of daily liv- ing—the ability to hear everyday speech.1

The data from which this formula1 was developed indicate that the ability to hear everyday sounds under everyday listening conditions is not impaired when the average of the hearing levels at 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 Hz is 25 dB or less. The 25-dB “fence” represents this finding; it is not a compensa- tory adjustment for presbycusis, the hearing loss that occurs with age.


This method of evaluating hearing impairment should be applied only to adults who have acquired language skills. Evidence suggests that language acquisition by children who do not have language skills may be delayed when the average hearing level is in the range of 15 to 25 dB.

According to the above standards for monaural hear- ing impairment, for every decibel that the average hearing level or loss for speech exceeds 25 dB, 1.5% of monaural impairment is assigned. Thus, with an average hearing level loss of 67 dB above 25 dB, monaural impairment is 100% (Table 11-1).


Evaluation of Binaural Hearing Impairment Hearing impairment of both ears, referred to as bin- aural impairment, indicates a loss of hearing of greater than 25 dB in both ears at frequencies of 500, 1000, 2000, and/or 3000 Hz.

Binaural impairment is determined by the following formula:
  binaural hearing impairment (%) = [5 x (% hearing impairment better ear)
+ (% hearing impairment poorer ear)] 6
To calculate binaural impairment when only one ear exhibits hearing impairment, use the above formula, allowing 0% impairment for the unimpaired ear (the ear with the better hearing).


Alternatively, use Table 11-2, which is derived from the formula given above, to calculate the value for binaural hearing impairment. Then apply the value for binaural hearing impairment to Table 11-3, which converts binaural hearing impairment to impairment of the whole person.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-1
5% Impairment Due to Hearing Loss


Subject: 70-year-old woman.
History: Chronic recurrent ear infections since teens. Occasional drainage from right ear. Right ear now dry but feels “like stuffed with cotton.” Has occasional tinnitus in right ear; not bother- some. No dizziness.
Current Symptoms: Difficulty hearing, especially in right ear, with no impact on activities of daily living. No recent drainage.
Physical Exam: Scarred, retracted right tympanic membrane. Left tympanic membrane is thickened and retracted. Pneumo-otoscopy shows motion of left tympanic membrane, but no motion on right.
Clinical Studies: Tympanograms: B pattern for right ear and C pattern for left ear. Speech discrimination score: 95% for right ear; 80% for left ear. Acoustic immitance: reveals normal external auditory canal volumes for both ears. Pure tone audiometry reveals the following threshold levels in decibels (dB):


Diagnosis: Mixed (sensorineural + conductive) hear- ing impairment, right ear. Mild sensorineural hearing impairment, left ear.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The decimal sum of hearing threshold levels (DSHL) for the right ear is 225 (40 + 55 + 60 + 70), and the DSHL for the left ear is 125 (25 + 30 + 30 + 40). Combine 225 (worse ear) and 125 (better ear) using Table 11-2 for a binau- ral hearing impairment rating (BI) of 15.6%. Use
Table 11-3 to obtain the 5% whole person impair- ment rating.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-2
8% Impairment Due to Hearing Loss

Subject: 65-year-old woman.
History: Repeated ear infections for many years. Hearing loss in both ears and roaring, pulsing, rushing-water tinnitus in both ears. No history of dizziness. Tympanoplasty, left ear, 4 months ago.
Current Symptoms: Difficulty hearing in both ears, but hearing much improved in left ear since tym- panoplasty. Still has tinnitus in both ears, which impacts some activities of daily living.
Physical Exam: Retracted right tympanic membrane.
Clinical Studies: Left tympanic membrane shows well-healed graft. Tympanograms: B pattern for right ear. Tympanometry was not performed
for left ear due to recent otologic surgery. Speech discrimination scores: 80% for right ear; 85% for left ear. Pure tone audiometry reveals the follow- ing threshold levels in decibels (dB):


Diagnosis: Mixed (sensorineural + conductive) hear- ing impairment, bilaterally.
Impairment Rating: 8% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The DSHL for the right ear is 210 (50 + 50 + 55 + 55), and the DSHL for the left ear is 135 (25 + 30 + 40 + 40). Combine 210 (worse ear) and 135 (better ear) using Table 11-2 for a BI of 17.8%. Add 5% for the presence of tinnitus, giving a BI of 22.8%. Use Table 11-3 to obtain the 8% whole person impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-3
8% Impairment Due to Hearing Loss


Subject: 64-year-old man.
History: Progressive hearing loss for 13 years.
Worked in several noisy environments; used hear- ing protectors fairly regularly. Exposure to gunfire during 4 years of service in the Marines. General health good. No history of tinnitus or vertigo.
Current Symptoms: Difficulty with communication at home, in restaurants, driving a car, and in noisy environments.
Physical Exam: No abnormalities.
Clinical Studies: Audiologic tests: speech reception threshold of 20 dB. Pure tone audiometry reveals the following threshold levels in decibels (dB):


Diagnosis: Sensorineural hearing impairment, bilateral.
Impairment Rating: 8% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The impairment calculated from this audiogram is based on the DSHL. The DSHL for the right ear is 175 (20 + 15 + 60 + 80), and the
DSHL for the left ear is 160 (25 + 15 + 60 + 60). Combine 175 (worse ear) and 160 (better ear) using Table 11-2 for a binaural hearing impair- ment of 23.4%. Use Table 11-3 to obtain the
8% whole person impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

11.2 b Equilibrium
Equilibrium, or orientation in space, is maintained by the visual, kinesthetic, and vestibular mechanisms.
When impairments of equilibrium are predominantly due to or have effects on other organ systems, the impairment should be evaluated in the relevant organ system, eg, disorders of the nervous system (Chapter 13), cardiovascular system (Chapters 3 and 4), and visual system (Chapter 12).

Disturbances of equilibrium may be classified as fol- lows: (1) vertigo, a sensation of rotation of the sub- ject or of objects about the subject in any plane;
(2) giddiness or lightheadedness, distinguished from vertigo by the absence of feelings of movement2; and
(3) abnormalities of postural stability and/or standing balance with or without vertigo. Vertigo may be pro- duced by disorders of the vestibular mechanism and its central nervous system components, including the cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and brain stem, and by eye movements.

Permanent impairment may result from any disorder causing vertigo or disorientation in space. Three reg- ulatory systems—vestibular, ocular (visual), and kinesthetic (proprioceptive)—are related to the vestibulo-ocular reflex. The evaluation of impair- ments of equilibrium may include consideration of one or more of these mechanisms.5,6 This chapter addresses only disturbances in equilibrium due to vestibular disorders.

Clinical evaluations may include electronystagmog- raphy,2 caloric irrigation, positional and rotatory tests, dynamic posturography, Romberg and tandem Romberg tests, and radiological brain imaging stud- ies. The results of these laboratory tests should be correlated with validated clinical measures of bal- ance and ambulation to determine the true state of equilibratory dysfunction. For other causes of dis- equilibrium, see the relevant chapter, such as the neurologic system (Chapter 13), for central nervous system disorders.

Vestibular System
Permanent impairment can result from defects of the vestibular (labyrinthine) mechanism and its central connections. The defects are evidenced by loss of equilibrium produced by disturbance or loss of vestibular function.

Complete loss of vestibular function may be unilat- eral or bilateral. When the loss is unilateral, adequate central nervous system compensation may or may not occur. With total bilateral loss of vestibular func- tion, equilibrium is totally dependent on the kines- thetic and visual systems, which usually are unable to compensate fully for movement or ambulation.
Depending on the ability to perform activities of daily living, the percentage of permanent impairment of the whole person may range from 0% to 95%.

Disturbances of vestibular function are evidenced by vertigo (vestibular dysequilibrium) as defined above. Lightheadedness and abnormalities of gait not asso- ciated with vertigo are not defined here as being dis- turbances of vestibular function.

Vertigo may be accompanied by varying degrees of nausea, vomiting, headache, immobility, ataxia, and nystagmus. Movement may increase the vertigo and the accompanying signs and symptoms. Peripheral vestibular (labyrinthine) disorders are often associ- ated with hearing loss and tinnitus. Vestibular disor- ders may result in temporary or permanent impairments. Evaluation of vestibular impairment should be performed when the condition is stable and maximum adjustment has been achieved, which generally is considered to occur months after resolu- tion of the disease or injury.5,6

The classification in Table 11-4 has been developed for evaluation of those individuals with permanent disturbances of the vestibular mechanism. The impairment ratings reflect the severity of the perma- nent impairment and the ability of the individual to perform activities of daily living. Since vestibular disorders are dynamic, assessment of permanent impairment should be based on determination of the person’s condition after it is stable. Although symp- toms may be intermittent, the examiner needs to gauge functioning during episodes with exacerba- tions. Vestibular impairment as defined here is rated similarly in Chapter 13.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-4
0% Impairment Due to Floating Vestibular Otoconia
Subject: 70-year-old man.
History: Retired physician; onset of dizziness last week when leaning head to right or to left side. Sensation of giddiness with positional change of body but not with turning of head when upright. No nausea or vomiting. Uses the Epley maneuver to reposition otoconia.
Current Symptoms: Asymptomatic; the dizziness has not recurred; no disruption of activities of daily living.
Clinical Studies: ENG study: normal. Dix-Hallpike test: positive, with head rotation to the left and to the right.
Diagnosis: Floating vestibular otoconia.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Treatment to be repeated as necessary.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-5
1% to 10% Impairment Due to Labyrinthitis


Subject: 50-year-old-woman.
History: Sudden onset of severe vertigo, nausea, and vomiting. No history of upper respiratory infection, fever, cough, or chills. Confined to bed.
Spontaneous nystagmus to left noted. Hearing nor- mal; no tinnitus. Treated with vestibular suppres- sors. Gradual, slow recovery of ability to ambulate, but unable to walk in the dark for about 1 year.
Current Symptoms: Can perform activities of daily living without assistance. Slightly unsteady when fatigued. Does not tolerate rocking motion (sail- boat) without visual fixation of horizon. Unable to ride bicycle, but can drive automobile at night.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: ENG and caloric studies: no vestibu- lar function of right ear. Other neuro-otologic find- ings: within normal limits. Audiogram: normal hearing bilaterally. Mastoid X-rays: normal. CT scans of temporal bones: normal.
Diagnosis: Labyrinthitis, probably viral, with total loss of vestibular function, right ear.


Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Class 2 impairment, with moderate loss of function.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-6
11% to 30% Impairment Due to Vestibular Disorders

Subject: 40-year-old woman.
History: Nurse; progressive hearing loss in left ear, increased difficulty with gait, some loss of bal- ance with falling to the left, and slurred speech when fatigued for 3 months. History of hyperten- sion, controlled with beta-blockers. Audiogram showed normal hearing in right ear, 80-dB sen- sorineural hearing loss in left ear. Tympanograms were type A bilaterally. Acoustic reflex was absent in left ear. Vestibular tests suggested marked left peripheral end-organ lesion. Changes in oculomotor testing suggested brainstem involvement on the left side. Other neuro-otologic tests showed minimal left facial nerve weakness. MRI studies showed large left cerebellopontine angle (CPA) mass involving the left internal audi- tory canal. At surgery, via the translabyrinthine route, a 4-cm tumor of the left CPA, with second- ary brain stem compression, was removed.
Current Symptoms: Walks with broad-based gait with slight limp. Has fallen twice since surgery.
Physical Exam: Slight weakness in lower extremi- ties and control motions of left upper and lower extremities. Left facial paralysis. Total hearing loss in left ear. Left cerebellar tremor, in the upper extremity more than in the lower. Ophthalmologic exam reveals exposure keratopathy without microbial keratitis, left eye.
Clinical Studies: Neuro-otologic and neurologic: total loss of hearing and of vestibular function, left ear. No evident tumor, but changes in brain stem area noted on MRI. Electroencephalogram: no evidence of epileptiform activity. Gait and

balance scores: abnormal for age. Left lateral canthoplasty with insertion of gold weights in left upper eyelid was performed, plus a cross-face sural nerve graft to the left face.
Diagnosis: Large left acoustic neuroma with postop- erative total left auditory and vestibular impair- ments and left facial nerve paralysis.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment due to vestibular disorders; combine with appropriate ratings for other impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Preoperatively active. Exercises; walks with some difficulty; can perform self-care and limited household activities; unable to drive a car or to continue to work.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-7
31% to 60% Impairment Due to Chronic Vestibular Disorder

Subject: 43-year-old woman.
History: Dizziness for the past 6 years. Has con- sulted many physicians. In the past has had gall bladder problems and recurrent renal infections. No history of trauma or surgery. No history of chronic drug ingestion, but currently taking an antidepressant. Nonsmoker.
Current Symptoms: Occasional double vision dur- ing past year. Cannot drive. Does self-care slowly because of dizziness. Denies hearing loss. Self- rated as moderately impaired. Requires assistance with daily tasks.
Physical Exam: Hearing within normal limits.
Blood pressure is normal.
Clinical Studies: Posturography: abnormal.
Exhibits 50% caloric weakness in right ear. No directional preponderance. Rotatory tests: normal. Dix-Hallpike test: normal. Oculomotor tests: nor- mal. Responded poorly to habituation exercises.


Diagnosis: Chronic vestibular disorder.
Impairment Rating: 31% to 60% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Ophthalmologic evaluation required to evaluate visual complaints.
---END EXAMPLE---

11.3  The Face
The face, its parts, and its structural components serve multiple functions: protection of underlying structures and organs (such as the eyes), portals of entry for deglutition and respiration, and communi- cation through expression and speech.

The skin covers the body, acts as a physical barrier to underlying structures, provides sensory perception, regulates temperature and body fluids, and resists trauma. See Chapter 8 for primary skin impairments.

The portal for deglutition is the mouth and lips. Disturbances in function can result in drooling or inability to keep food or liquid in the mouth while eating. The lips and mouth also serve in vocal articu- lation, adding intelligibility to speech. The nose and mouth are the portals of entry for respiration.
Impairment may be a result of neurologic disorders, such as partial or complete paralysis of the lips; scar formation and contracture of the lips; or loss of tissue.

The face plays a unique role in communication. No other part of the body serves as specific a function for personal identity and for the expression of thought and emotion. Facial expressions are an inte- gral part of normal living postures. A degree of nor- malcy is needed for effective verbal and nonverbal communication. Facial anatomy contributes to iden- tity, expression, and normal functioning, and to the appearance of the forehead and cheeks; eyes, eyelids, and eyebrows; lips and mouth; nose; and chin and neck. The face is such a prominent feature that it plays a critical role in the individual’s physical, psy- chological, and emotional makeup. Facial disfigure- ment can affect all of these components and can result in social and vocational handicaps and even psychiatric impairment.
11.3
a Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Facial Disorders and/or Disfigurement To evaluate permanent impairment due to a disorder or disfigurement of the face, consider changes in anatomy and function and the effect of the impair- ment on the ability to perform activities of daily liv- ing. This section deals with permanent impairment as it relates mainly to the face’s structural integrity. For loss of function involving other aspects of the func- tioning of the face, refer to the specific organ system involved and combine the structural integrity loss with the relevant loss of function. Loss of structural integrity can result from cutaneous disfigurement, such as that due to abnormal pigmentation or scars, or from loss of supporting structures, such as soft tis- sue, bone, or cartilage of the facial skeleton. Other information on cutaneous disfigurement appears in Chapter 8 (The Skin).
Disfigurement of the face can result from many causes, particularly burns, traumatic injury, surgery, infections, or dysplasia. Effects on individuals can vary tremendously, as can remaining function. Total disfigurement of the face after treatment should be deemed a 16% to 50% impairment of the whole per- son, dependent also upon the degree of functional loss. For the assessment of psychosocial impairment due to disfigurement, refer to Chapter 14 on mental and behavioral disorders.

Facial disfigurement may be considered total if it is severe and grossly deforming of the face and fea- tures. Such disfigurement must involve at least the entire area between the brow line and the upper lip on both sides. Severe disfigurement above the brow line should be deemed to be, at a maximum, 1% impairment of the whole person. If disfigurement is severe below the upper lip, it may be deemed to be 8% impairment of the whole person. Specific, promi- nent facial disfigurements are estimated as shown in Table 11-5.


Comment: No loss of nasal function or nasal bone structural integrity. Appearance of nose did not change. Scar falls in skinfold line and is barely visible.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-8
0% to 5% Impairment Due to Facial Disorders and/or Disfigurement
Subject: 25-year-old woman.
History: Struck in nose with baseball bat 1 year pre- viously; sustained 2-cm laceration across dorsum of nose with minimally displaced nasal bone frac- tures. Underwent closed reduction of fractures of nasal bones and repair of laceration. Returned to normal activities after normal recovery.
Current Symptoms: Small scar on top of nose.
Physical Exam: Normal nasal region except for well-healed, stable 1.5-cm scar across glabellar region. Scar falls in skinfold lines.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Residual scar on dorsum of nose from compound nasal bone fracture.
Impairment Rating: 1% impairment of the whole person.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-9
0% to 5% Impairment Due to Facial Disorders and/or Disfigurement

Subject: 36-year-old man.
History: Fell off tractor at work 18 months previ- ously and sustained deep abrasion over right cheek and fracture of right zygomatic arch.
Surgery was performed with closed reduction of zygomatic arch fracture and debridement of right cheek wound. Fracture healed well and main- tained its normal anatomical position. Deep abra- sion healed well with additional topical wound care. Returned to normal activities shortly after injury.
Current Symptoms: Injured skin area on right cheek is lighter than normal surrounding skin, especially after sun exposure, but does not require medical care, even with prolonged sun exposure.
Physical Exam: 3- to 4-cm area of skin on right cheek is lighter than uninjured skin. Injured skin has irregular, rough “cobblestone” appearance in some areas. Right zygomatic arch has normal appearance and projection compared to left side.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Stable scar on right cheek with loss of normal skin color and residual skin texture changes. Healed fracture.


Impairment Rating: 3% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: No permanent loss of structural integrity of arch. Injured skin area has lost some structural integrity, but healed without surgery. Area has abnormal pigmentation and appearance compared to surrounding skin.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-10
6% to 10% Impairment Due to Facial Disorders and/or Disfigurement

Subject: 35-year-old woman.
History: Struck across nasal region 19 months previ- ously by a box that had fallen off a shelf in a store. Sustained crush injury to face with com- pound fracture of nasal bones and compound frac- ture of frontal bone that goes into frontal sinus.
Fractures and wounds were surgically repaired. Wounds and bones healed well. Frontal sinus and nasal respiratory function returned to normal. No additional surgery. Returned to normal activities.
Current Symptoms: Affected area is darker than surrounding skin; hollow area over nasofrontal region.
Physical Exam: Slightly brown discoloration of skin over superior dorsal nasal and glabellar regions.
3-cm depression 3 to 4 mm deep over frontal sinus region.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Healed compound nasal and frontal bone fractures. Residual skin pigmentation changes.
Loss of structural integrity of frontal bone.
Impairment Rating: 6% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Although initial injury required extensive surgery, permanent loss of structural integrity of skin and frontal bone involves relatively small area, with no anticipated problems with function of nose or nasal passages.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-11
6% to 10% Impairment Due to Facial Disorders and/or Disfigurement

Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: Struck on right side of face with a heavy pipe 14 months previously. Sustained crush injury to right facial region; deep laceration along infe- rior orbital rim; and fractures of malar (“tripod”), orbital floor, and nasal bones. Refused additional surgery. Quickly recovered and returned to normal activities after surgical repair of injuries.
Current Symptoms: Scars on right lower eyelid and lateral orbital regions. Sunken appearance of right eye and right cheekbone. Nose is wider and flatter than it was before injury. Individual is embar- rassed by his appearance but has no complaints of loss of vision or nasal function.
Physical Exam: Well-healed, stable, 1- to 2-cm scars over right inferior and lateral orbital rim regions, with palpable metal plates beneath scars. 1-cm depression of right malar eminence (com- pared to left side). Mild to moderate enophthal- mos of right orbit. Nasal bones have smooth, flat depression in nasofrontal region.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Depression of right malar bone and nasal bones; enophthalmos of right orbit; scars on right lower eyelid and lateral orbital skin.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Structural integrity of right orbital and nasal regions was lost, leaving permanent, meas- urable depressions and enophthalmos.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-12
11% to 15% Impairment Due to Facial Disorders and/or Disfigurement

Subject: 35-year-old woman.
History: Sustained gunshot wound to face 9 months previously. Bullet blew off portion of left side of nose and created open, deep wound on left cheek. Returned to most normal activities after undergo- ing several operations.
Current Symptoms: Scar on left cheek. Missing tip of nose on left side. She is uncomfortable with her appearance.
Physical Exam: Significant depression on left tip of nose due to loss of left lateral cartilage and nasal tissue. Alar region on left has significant shorten- ing compared to right side and partially consists of grafted tissue, which has whiter, thicker appearance than skin on right side. Left cheek has a stable, soft scar approximately 4 cm long by 2 mm wide running from left nasolabial fold to left lateral orbital region.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Loss of skin and cartilage on left tip of nose and scar on left cheek.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Reconstructive surgery was able to somewhat correct cosmetic defect. But loss of an anatomical part and a significant scar on left cheek have affected self-image.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-13
11% to 15% Impairment Due to Facial Disorders and/or Disfigurement

Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Struck with large hook in left eye while working on fishing boat 18 months previously. Eye was destroyed due to injury and replaced with prosthetic eye. Returned to most normal activities.
Current Symptoms: Loss of function of left eye.
Physical Exam: Loss of left eye.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Loss of left eye.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Combine impairment with impairment resulting from total loss of vision in left eye, as determined according to criteria in Chapter 12.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-14
16% to 50% Impairment Due to Facial Disorders and/or Disfigurement

Subject: 34-year-old man.
History: Thrown and kicked in face by a bull 26 months previously. Sustained crush injury to right side of face and compound fractures of mandible, nasal bones, and orbital bones. Subsequently developed severe infection in face, which required multiple surgical procedures. Operations resulted in loss of most of the normal skin and muscle on right side of nose, right cheek, and right side of upper lip. Nasal septum cartilage and tip were lost. Bones of right side of nose, right half of mandible, and right anterior maxillary region were lost. Underwent no further reconstructive procedures but has been fitted with facial prosthe- ses. Condition is stable. Required speech therapy due to loss of articulatory function. Required help


in management of diet because of permanent dietary restriction to semisolid or soft foods.
Current Symptoms: Altered speech with loss of abil- ity to speak well. Loss of skin and bones on right side of face. Loss of ability to eat normal food.
Physical Exam: Loss of normal skin, muscles, and bone structures on right side of nose and in right mandibular and right anterior maxillary
regions. Speech is poorly articulated and has low intensity due to loss of skin and muscle on right side of mouth.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Massive loss of normal structural integrity of right side of face and loss of normal speech function and mastication.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Combine with other impairments for loss of speech (Section 11.4d) and mastication (Section 11.4b).
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-15
16% to 50% Impairment Due to Facial Disorders and/or Disfigurement

Subject: 45-year-old woman.
History: Sustained severe electrical injury to face 26 months previously with loss of left orbital struc- tures, skin on left cheek, and anterior maxillary sinus bones.
Current Symptoms: Lost vision in left eye and is missing left side of face. Individual says she looks like a freak.
Physical Exam: Loss of left orbital structures with open orbital region. No bones remain on orbital floor or inferior orbital rim. Left anterior maxil- lary sinus regions and overlying skin and muscles are gone, leaving large, residual, open orbital and maxillary cavity.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Massive loss of normal facial structural integrity.
Impairment Rating: 40% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Combine with other impairments from the vision chapter (Chapter 12) and mental and behavioral chapter (Chapter 14).
11.4
The Nose, Throat, and Related
	Structures
The nasal region includes the external part of the nose, the nasal cavity, and the nasopharynx. The oral region includes the mouth and lips, teeth, temporo- mandibular joint, tongue, hard and soft palate, region of the palatine tonsil, and oropharynx. The neck and chest region includes the hypopharynx, larynx, tra- chea, esophagus, and bronchi.
---END EXAMPLE---
The functions of these structures, and the order in which they will be discussed, are as follows: (1) res- piration, (2) mastication and deglutition, (3) olfaction and taste, and (4) speech. Permanent impairment may result from a deviation from normal in any of the above functions, and, because of their close rela- tionship, more than one structure may be involved.


11.4a Respiration
Respiration may be defined as the act or function of breathing, that is, the act by which air is inspired and expired from the lungs. The respiratory mechanism includes the lungs and the air passages; the latter includes the nares, nasal cavities, mouth, pharynx, larynx, trachea, and bronchi.

In this chapter, discussion of permanent impairments related to respiration is limited to defects of the air passages. Refer to Chapter 5 on the respiratory sys- tem for a discussion of impairments of the lower air- ways and lung parenchyma.

The most commonly encountered defect of the air passages is obstruction, which may be partial, as with stenosis, or complete, as with occlusion.
Obstructions and other air passage defects are evi- denced primarily by dyspnea or so-called unusual breathlessness. Sleep apnea, which is covered in Chapter 5, may be related to functional upper-airway obstruction.

Dyspnea is a cardinal factor that contributes to an individual’s diminished capacity to carry out activi- ties of daily living and to permanent impairment.
This subjective complaint or symptom, which indi- cates an awareness of respiratory distress, usually is noted first and is most severe during exercise. When dyspnea occurs at rest, respiratory dysfunction prob- ably is severe. Dyspnea may or may not be accompa- nied by related signs or symptoms.


Individuals with air passage defects may be evalu- ated in accordance with the classification in Table 11-6. Permanent impairments involving obstructive sleep apnea should be evaluated with the respiratory system criteria described in Chapter 5.


*Prophylactic restriction of activity, such as strenuous competitive sport, does not exclude subject from class 1.
Note: Individuals with successful permanent tracheostomy or stoma should be rated at 25% impairment of the whole person.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-16
0% to 10% Impairment Due to Right Vocal Fold Paralysis

Subject: 26-year-old man.
History: Spinal cord tumor removed 4 years ago, with right anterior cervical fusion. Persistent hoarseness since surgery. Had to give up coaching.
Current Symptoms: Voice stable, but weak, with poor volume and projection. Coughing and clear- ing of throat develop after drinking cold liquids. No shortness of breath or difficulty swallowing.
Physical Exam: Ear, nose, and throat examination: within normal limits.
Clinical Studies: Fiberoptic laryngoscopy: right vocal cord in paramedian position, with a 2- 3-mm gap on attempted phonation.
Diagnosis: Right vocal fold paralysis.
Impairment Rating: 5% to 10% impairment due to vocal fold paralysis; combine with appropriate rating for musculoskeletal impairment to deter- mine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Partial obstruction of the laryngeal airway.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-17
11% to 29% Impairment Due to Bilateral Vocal Fold Paralysis and Permanent Tracheostomy

Subject: 29-year-old man.
History: Tracheostomy performed 10 years ago after traumatic tracheal intubation. Diagnosed with Arnold-Chiari syndrome and underwent success- ful neurosurgical decompression. Developed meningitis of unknown etiology, hemiparesis, and other neurologic sequellae. Past history reveals hearing loss, hypertension, and diabetes. 20-year cigarette use.
Current Symptoms: Wheelchair dependent. Metal tracheotomy tube in place. With tube occluded, has good voice but poor airway.
Physical Exam: Right-side hemiparesis and right- side hearing loss.
Clinical Studies: Fiberoptic laryngoscopy: both vocal folds in midline position with very poor abduction.
Diagnosis: Bilateral vocal fold paralysis with poor airway. Permanent tracheostomy.
Impairment Rating: 29% impairment due to vocal fold paralysis; combine with appropriate ratings for musculoskeletal and hearing impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Monitor for tracheostomy patency.
---END EXAMPLE---

11.4 b Mastication and Deglutition
The act of eating includes mastication and degluti- tion. Numerous conditions of nongastrointestinal origin, singly or in combination, may interfere with these functions.

Dysfunction of the temporomandibular joint may impede mastication, affect speech, cause lower facial deformity, and produce pain.7,8 In this section, the effect of temporomandibular joint dysfunction on eating is considered; other effects may be considered in conjunction with parts of the Guides that deal with the nervous system or pain.

In accordance with the philosophy of the Guides, when mastication and deglutition are evaluated, the ability to eat should be stable and maximal rehabili- tation should have been achieved. When mastication or deglutition is impaired, the imposition of dietary restrictions usually results. Such restrictions are the most objective criteria by which to evaluate perma- nent impairment of these functions.9-14 The relation- ship of the restrictions to impairments of mastication and deglutition are shown in Table 11-7.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-18
5% to 19% Impairment Due to Inflammation and Scarring of the Left Temporomandibular Joint

Subject: 58-year-old woman.
History: Following removal of an impacted upper left third molar, individual developed a left oro- antral fistula and acute left maxillary sinusitis, confirmed by x-ray. Dental films confirmed a tooth remnant in the maxillary area. Despite use of antibiotics, she developed persistent drainage from the fistula and pain in the left maxillary area of the face. Severe pain was noted in the left tem- poromandibular joint (TMJ), and she experienced

progressive loss of mobility of the mandible, with the ability to open the jaws limited to a 1-cm excur- sion. The left oro-antral fistula was explored surgi- cally 6 weeks later, and the residual tooth fragment was removed. A left naso-antral window was placed in the inferior meatus for drainage of the maxillary sinus. Extensive scarring in and about the left TMJ was found. The scars were released, but full mobility of the mandible was not obtained until the left coronoid process was released from the sur- rounding tissues. She received postoperative steroid therapy; physical therapy exercises maintained mandibular mobility. A stent to keep the jaws apart was created and used for several months while individual was sleeping.
Current Symptoms: On a soft diet because of dis- comfort in the left TMJ.
Physical Exam: Maxillary mobility limited to about 60% of mobility noted at surgery, with a well- healed oral fistula area.
Clinical Studies: Paranasal sinus x-rays: normal.
Diagnosis: Inflammation and scarring of the left TMJ; reduced mandibular mobility.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Individual is able to talk satisfactorily, but dietary choices are limited. Speech is not affected. No facial deformity, but she may need to continue exercises to maintain maxillary mobility. No problem in maintaining body weight.
---END EXAMPLE---

11.4c Olfaction and Taste
Only rarely does complete loss of the closely related senses of olfaction and taste seriously affect an indi- vidual’s performance of the usual activities of daily living. For this reason, a value of 1% to 5% impair- ment of the whole person is suggested for use in cases involving partial or complete bilateral loss of either sense due to peripheral lesions. This value is to be combined with any other impairment of the indi- vidual (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).


11.4d Speech
In this chapter, speech is defined as the capacity to produce vocal signals that can be heard, understood, and sustained over a useful period of time. Speech ought to allow effective communication in the activi- ties of daily living.


This chapter does not consider the causes and char- acteristics of abnormal speech. Rather, it considers how an impairment relates to the individual’s ability or efficiency in using speech to make himself or her- self understood in activities of daily living. It is assumed that speech evaluation pertains to the pro- duction of voice and articulate speech and not to the language content or structure of the individual’s communication. On the basis of these assumptions, the primary problem is estimating proficiency in the use of oral language or measuring the utility of speech as defined above. This section also considers esophageal speech.

At this time there is no single, acceptable, proven test that will measure objectively the degrees of impairment due to the many varieties of speech dis- orders. Therefore, it is recommended that speech impairment be evaluated by examining the audibility, intelligibility, and functional efficiency of speech.
• Audibility is based on the ability to speak at a level sufficient to be heard.
• Intelligibility is based on the ability to articulate and to link phonetic units of speech with sufficient accuracy to be understood.
• Functional efficiency is based on the ability to pro- duce a satisfactorily rapid rate of speaking and to sustain this rate over a useful period of time.

Other definable attributes of speech–such as voice quality, pitch, and melodic variation–are evaluated only when they affect one of the three primary characteristics noted above.

The classification chart, oral reading paragraph, and examining procedure used in estimating speech impairment are described below.


Classification Chart
Judgments as to the amount of impairment should be made with reference to the classes, percentages, and examples provided in the classification chart (Table 11-8). The 15 categories in the chart suggest
activities or situations with different levels of impair- ment. Data gathered from direct observation of the individual or from interviews should be compared with these categories, and values should be assigned on the basis of the specific impairments that are present.

Oral Reading Paragraph
The following paragraph, entitled “The Smith House,” is composed of 100 words and 10 sentences. It provides a uniform means of comparing a speech sample of the person being evaluated with the speech of normal speakers. The phonetic elements of the paragraph are selected particularly for their relevance to the intelligibility of the person’s speech.
The Smith House
Larry and Ruth Smith have been married nearly 14
years. They have a small place near Long Lake. Both of them think there’s nothing like the country for health. Their two boys would rather live here than any other place. Larry likes to keep some saddle horses close to the house. These make it easy to keep his sons amused. If they wish, the boys can go fishing along the shore. When it rains, they usually want to watch television. Ruth has a cherry tree on each side of the kitchen door. In June they enjoy the juice and jelly.


Examining Procedure
General Orientation
The examiner should have normal hearing as defined in the earlier section in this chapter on hearing. The setting of the examination should be a reasonably quiet room that approximates the noise levels of everyday living.

The examiner should base judgments of impairment on two kinds of evidence: (1) attention to and obser- vation of the individual’s speech in the office—for example, during conversation, during the interview, and while reading and counting aloud—and (2) reports pertaining to the individual’s performance in everyday living situations. The reports or the evi- dence should be supplied by reliable observers who know the person well. The standard of evaluation is an average speaker’s performance in average situa- tions of everyday living. It is assumed in this context that an average speaker can usually perform accord- ing to the following criteria:

• Talk in a loud voice when the occasion demands it.
• Sustain phonation for at least 10 seconds after one breath.
• Complete at least a 10-word sentence in one breath.
• Form all of the phonetic units of American speech and join them intelligibly.
• Maintain a speech rate of at least 75 to 100 words per minute and sustain a flow of speech for a rea- sonable length of time. A speech rate of 125 words per minute enables a speaker to read approxi- mately one 81/2 x 11-inch page of double-spaced text in 2 minutes.

.


Specific Instructions
1. Place the individual approximately 8 ft from the examiner.
2. Interview the individual. This will permit obser- vation of his or her speech in ordinary conversa- tion while pertinent historical information is obtained.
3. Have the individual’s back toward the examiner and keep a separation of 8 ft between the exam- iner and the examinee. Instruct the person as fol- lows: “You are to read this passage so I can hear you plainly. Be sure to speak so I can understand you.” Then ask him or her to read aloud the short paragraph, “The Smith House.”
4. If additional reading procedures are required, simple prose paragraphs from a magazine may be used. A person who cannot read may be
requested to give his or her name and address and name all the days of the week and months of the year. Additional evidence regarding the person’s rate of speech and ability to sustain it may be obtained by noting the time required to count to 100 by ones. Completion of this task in 60 to 75 seconds is accepted as normal.
5. Record judgment of the individual’s speech capacity with regard to each of the three rows of the classification chart (Table 11-8). The degree of impairment of speech is equivalent to the greatest percentage of impairment recorded in any one of the three rows of the classification chart.

For example, a person’s speech capacity is judged to be the following: audibility, 10% (class 1); intelli- gibility, 50% (class 3); and functional efficiency,
30% (class 2). The individual’s speech impairment is judged to be equivalent to the greatest impairment (50%). A speech impairment of 50% is judged to be an 18% impairment of the whole person, according to Table 11-9.

11.4e Voice
Voice, as the term is used in this section, refers to the production of audible sounds by the vibration of the true vocal folds of the larynx. Voice, or phonation, is therefore the generator of speech—the shaping of sounds into intelligible words. Alternative physiolog- ical sound generators, such as the false vocal folds or the esophagus, are not considered here.

This section does not consider the causes of voice disorders. Rather, it recognizes that voice disorders may present such definable symptoms as abnormal volume (voice fatigue, weakness, or low sound inten- sity), abnormal control (pitch and/or melodic varia- tion), and/or abnormal quality (hoarseness, harshness, or breathiness). These symptoms indicate abnormal physiological functioning of the phonatory mechanism and may contribute to impairment of speech.

At this time, there is no single, acceptable, proven test that will measure objectively the degrees of impairment associated with the many varieties of voice disorders. Tests such as laryngoscopy, acousti- cal analysis of voice, strobovideolaryngoscopy, analysis of phonatory function, and laryngeal elec- tromyography are recognized as appropriate and useful.15-17 The significance of current normative data is unclear when confined to consideration of impairment.


For voice and/or speech impairments, the classifica- tions in Table 11-8 and Table 11-9 should be used. Note that the impairment ratings for speech and/or voice impairments are not evaluated separately. The degree of impairment of speech and/or voice is equivalent to the greatest percentage of impairment recorded in any one of the three sections (audibility, intelligibility, or functional efficiency) of the classifi- cation chart (Table 11-8).


United States to receive necessary voice care. Voice is now of a sufficient intensity for most everyday speech needs. However, because of her emotional distress, loss of her previous occupa- tion as an international opera star, and change in activities of daily living, an impairment rating is warranted.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-19
0% to 14% Voice/Speech Impairment

Subject: 47-year-old woman.
History: Professional operatic soprano and voice teacher; had sudden onset of dysphonia 1 year previously; diagnosis was vocal fold hemorrhage. Developed vocal fold mass secondary to hemor- rhage. Gastroesophageal reflux. Five vocal fold surgeries for repeated vocal fold masses. Had operations to attempt to reduce vocal fold scar.
Advised to undergo another surgical procedure that would implant fat into vocal fold.
Current Symptoms: Husky speaking voice; lowered pitch; oral dryness; postnasal drip. Unable to
sing or perform professionally since vocal fold hemorrhage.
Physical Exam: Voice is mildly hoarse, mildly soft, and slightly breathy. Left vocal fold posthemor- rhagic cyst, right vocal fold mass, left vocal fold scar, possible mild superior laryngeal nerve paresis, muscular tension dysphonia, and gastro-esophageal reflux disease on laryngeal examination by strobovideolaryngoscopy. Singing technique was very good and was able to correct minor technical deficiencies.
Clinical Studies: Mild decrease in maximum phona- tion time and air-conduction flow.
Diagnosis: Recurrent vocal fold hemorrhage and vocal fold scar. Intermittently uncontrolled gas- troesophageal reflux disease. Obesity. Inability to regain singing voice she had prior to the vocal fold injury. Altered and diminished self-image.
Impairment Rating: 0% to 14% voice/speech impairment; 0% to 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Afraid her career is over. Traumatic change in self-image. Unable to resume her living as an internationally known opera star. Resigned her teaching position in Europe and moved to the
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-20
0% to 14% Voice/Speech Impairment


Subject: 58-year-old man.
History: Attorney; underwent thoracoscopic exci- sion of mediastinal schwannoma 2 months previ- ously. Postoperatively immediately developed hoarseness, breathiness, and dysphagia. Was diag- nosed with bilateral vocal fold weakness.
Underwent speech therapy but voice did not improve. Computed tomography (CT) scan of lar- ynx 1 month later revealed dislocated arytenoid cartilage.
Current Symptoms: Hoarseness; breathiness; decreased volume; lower pitch; voice fatigue. Cannot effectively communicate with clients in courtroom.
Physical Exam: All symptoms were noted, but examination of head and neck was otherwise nor- mal. Left arytenoid dislocation and left vocal fold paresis on strobovideolaryngoscopy. Sulcus vocalis.
Clinical Studies: Laryngeal electromyogram: left superior laryngeal nerve paresis with 50% decreased recruitment of left posterior cricoary- tenoid and vocalis muscle and 70% decreased recruitment response of left cricothyroid muscle. Normal right superior laryngeal nerve function. Evidence of right recurrent laryngeal nerve pare- sis. CT scan of larynx: widening of left cricoary- tenoid joint with anteromedial rotation of left arytenoid cartilage.
Diagnosis: Markedly decreased intensity, frequency range, and phonation time. All acoustic measure- ments were severely abnormal.
Impairment Rating: 0% to 14% voice/speech impairment; 0% to 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Had surgical correction of arytenoid dis- location. After surgery his voice was nearly nor- mal, with only slight voice breaks and slightly decreased volume.
---END EXAMPLE---

Comment: Class 2 on the basis of audibility and activ- ities of daily living, not including work. Unhappy with his vocal progress. Totally disabled as a profes- sional singer because of this work-related injury.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-21
15% to 34% Voice/Speech Impairment

Subject: 28-year-old man.
History: Rock-and-roll singer/songwriter; developed new onset of vocal difficulties while recording album 1 year previously. Had been singing and performing for 10 years with no prior vocal diffi- culties. Loss of midrange, decreased volume, breathiness, and hoarseness while singing.
Diagnosed with left vocal fold polyp 3 months later. Underwent surgical excision of lesion 1 month after that. Treated for laryngopharyngeal reflux with usual medical therapy.
Current Symptoms: Breathiness; hoarseness; loss of vocal stamina; loss of volume; loss of lower range. Voice is worse in morning, with frequent throat-clearing and sensation of lump in throat.
Physical Exam: Right vocal fold mass, left vocal fold scar, reflux laryngitis, and neurolaryngologic asymmetries on strobovideolaryngoscopy. Excess tension in jaw and tongue, hoarseness, and decreased range while singing.
Clinical Studies: Laryngeal electromyogram: 20% decreased function of left superior laryngeal nerve. Abnormalities in electroglottogram (EGG), quasi- open quotient, air-conduction flow, minimal flow, maximum flow rate, S/Z ratio, maximum phonation time, and acoustic measurements.
Diagnosis: Persistent vocal fold mass and vocal fold scar after recent vocal fold surgery; superior laryn- geal nerve paresis; laryngopharyngeal reflux disease.
Impairment Rating: 15% to 34% voice/speech impairment; 5% to 12% impairment of the whole person.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-22
15% to 34% Voice/Speech Impairment


Subject: 46-year-old man.
History: Voice teacher/singer; involved in motor vehicle collision 4 months ago in which he screamed loudly and seat belt tightened across anterior part of neck. Experienced immediate hoarseness and throat pain. Seen for treatment of sore throat 3 days later. Negative cultures.
Attempted to give two 30-minute performances 3 days after collision. Voice became hoarse, strained, and fatigued quickly. Experienced problems with pitch control. Has not performed or sung since.
Does not smoke or drink. Had direct laryngoscopy and biopsy, flexible bronchoscopy, and rigid esophagoscopy.
Current Symptoms: Hoarseness; voice fatigue; pain. Unable to sing or speak extensively. Weak, strained voice. Unable to project voice.
Physical Exam: Gastroesophageal reflux disease, height disparity of vocal folds, and white, irregu- lar, firm, vocal fold mass on laryngeal exam by strobovideolaryngoscopy.
Clinical Studies: Laryngeal electromyogram: left superior laryngeal nerve paresis with 50% decreased recruitment response and left recurrent laryngeal nerve paresis with 30% decreased recruitment, both from vocalis and posterior cricoarytenoid muscles. Objective voice meas- ures: mild acoustic abnormalities including increased mean flow rate and decreased maximum phonation time. Laryngeal CT scan: normal cricoarytenoid joint and no focal lesions. Normal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan with gadolinium of larynx.
Diagnosis: Infiltrating keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma of left vocal fold with evidence of focal chronic inflammatory infiltrate. Lesion was classified T2 N0 M0. Has undergone radiation therapy, reflux treatment, and voice therapy.
Impairment Rating: 15% to 34% voice/speech impairment; 5% to 12% impairment of the whole person.


Comment: May not be able to continue as a voice teacher and singer, with subsequent loss of income and life alteration. Will have to make fre- quent visits to physician for cancer surveillance, probably for life. Motor vehicle collision probably caused hemorrhage into previously asymptomatic cancerous tumor. Reflux was the only known risk factor in this nonsmoker. Voice became worse after surgery and radiation therapy.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-23
35% to 59% Voice/Speech Impairment

Subject: 52-year-old woman.
History: Chronic hoarseness and dysphonia for 10 years. Gastroesophageal reflux disease for at least 10 years. Multiple laryngeal surgeries, including vocal fold polypectomy, microlaryn- goscopy, excision of left vocal fold mass, and vaporization of laryngeal vocal fold varices.
Initial improvement with voice therapy; deterio- rated after heavy voice use in classroom.
Developed recurrent vocal fold mass. Had vocal fold hemorrhage after yelling. Multiple bouts of acute laryngitis secondary to voice overuse.
Recurrent vocal fold nodules that were initially treated with voice therapy. Experienced voice fatigue by Wednesday of each week. Developed severe upper respiratory infection that resulted
in vocal fold hemorrhage. Vocal fold stiffness and scar secondary to recurrent vocal fold hemor- rhages. Relatively asymptomatic for about a year.

Thereafter had ongoing treatment for reflux dis- ease and underwent voice therapy. Reflux disease became more problematic. Referred to gastroen- terologist for problem with gastroesophageal reflux. Considered surgical treatment of reflux disease.
Current Symptoms: Recurrent hoarseness, despite strictly adhering to antireflux treatment and voice therapy modifications.
Physical Exam: Left vocal fold scar, new right vocal fold mass (probably a cyst), evidence of reflux laryngitis, and muscle-tension dysphonia on strobovideolaryngoscopy. Voice hoarse, soft, and strained.
Clinical Studies: Abnormal acoustic measures, including harmonic measures and harmonic to noise ratio.
Diagnosis: Vocal fold mass and scar; muscle-tension dysphonia; reflux laryngitis.
Impairment Rating: 35% to 59% voice/speech impairment; 12% to 21% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Direct microlaryngoscopy and excision of right vocal fold mass; left vocal fold autolo- gous fat injection and, possibly, fat implantation for treatment of scar recommended. Rated class 3 on basis of audibility.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-24
35% to 59% Voice/Speech Impairment


Subject: 40-year-old man.
History: Recurrent sinusitis and progressive hoarse- ness for 2 years. Voice worse after vocal fold “polypectomy” for leukoplakia. Had septoplasty and functional endoscopic sinus surgery. No com- plaint of nasal/sinus disease. Speaks about 14 hours a day over loud noise. Must talk loudly or yell frequently. Is regularly exposed to car fumes, asbestos, and aerosols. Does not smoke. Rarely drinks alcohol.
Current Symptoms: Constant hoarseness. Difficulty speaking, but without pain, by afternoon. Frequently clears throat. Complains of lump in throat.


Physical Exam: Leukoplakia on left vocal fold and stiffness of vibratory margin secondary to scar on strobovideolaryngoscopy. Erythema and edema of glottis consistent with gastroesophageal reflux disease. Improper speaking technique and signifi- cant muscle-tension dysphonia.
Clinical Studies: Laryngeal electromyogram: left superior laryngeal nerve paresis and muscle-tension dysphonia. No evidence of neuromuscular junction abnormalities. Severely abnormal harmonic to noise ratios, decreased intensity, decreased frequency range, and decreased phonation time.
Diagnosis: Vocal fold scar, leukoplakia (hyperker- atosis), muscle-tension dysphonia, and gastroe- sophageal reflux disease.
Impairment Rating: 35% to 59% voice/speech impairment; 12% to 21% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Leukoplakia requires biopsy. Hoarseness caused by scarring from previous injury and from surgery is permanent.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-25
60% to 84% Voice/Speech Impairment

Subject: 40-year-old man.
History: Involved in motor vehicle collision
20 years previously. Sustained massive brain stem trauma and multiple injuries including fractured clavicle, shoulder, and hands. Was comatose for
8 weeks. Underwent tracheotomy and gastrostomy 3 days after collision. Left hemiparesis, cognitive deficits, memory loss, and “personality change.” Completed occupational therapy, physical therapy, and speech and cognitive rehabilitation.

Current Symptoms: Unable to be heard on tele- phone; cannot carry on sustained conversation; cannot raise voice above soft whisper.
Physical Exam: Extremely breathy, soft voice.
Halting speech pattern. Short phrasing. Can only count up to “eight” on one breath. Has left facial weakness, dysphagia, and chronic cough.
Bilateral vocal fold immobility with patent but narrow airway on strobovideolaryngoscopy.
Clinical Studies: Laryngeal electromyogram: bilat- eral vocal fold paralysis. Severely short phonation times. All acoustic measures: highly abnormal.
Diagnosis: Bilateral vocal fold paralysis.
Impairment Rating: 60% to 84% impairment due to bilateral vocal fold paralysis; 21% to 30% whole person impairment. Combine with appro- priate ratings due to other impairments to deter- mine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Underwent voice therapy. Conservative, anterior vocal fold medializations. Cannot be heard in office setting or anywhere with background noise. Is dysfluent and has halting speech (often interpreted by others as intellectual deficits). Unable to use the telephone. Unable to carry on sustained conversation. Unlikely to ever regain voice he had prior to motor vehicle collision. Requires ongoing medical care (not only for voice) and will require multiple laryngeal surgical procedures for voice improvement. Is prone to aspiration pneumonia sec- ondary to vocal fold paralysis. Requires ongoing voice therapy and voice-assistive devices.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-26
60% to 84% Voice/Speech Impairment

Subject: 42-year-old woman.
History: Taught elementary school 7 years previ- ously. Experienced sudden onset of hoarseness 1 month after starting teaching. Continued to teach for several months with hoarseness before
seeking medical attention. Otolaryngologist diag- nosed vocal fold nodules and recommended rest- ing voice for 4 days. She complied, but with no improvement in voice. Saw speech therapist weekly for 2 years with minimal voice improve- ment. Underwent excision of bilateral vocal fold masses. Voice improved until 6 months later, when recurrent hoarseness developed. Had recurrent vocal fold masses. Diagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux disease. Had surgery after aggressive medical treatment for reflux disease and after voice therapy. No improvement in appearance of vocal fold lesions. Had excisional biopsy for definitive pathology.
Current Symptoms: Constant hoarseness and voice fatigue. Unable to project voice well and unable to sing. Year-round allergy symptoms.
Physical Exam: Moderately hoarse and breathy voice. Broad-based, solid, white mass of right vocal fold and fibrotic mass of left vocal fold on strobovideolaryngoscopy. Arytenoid erythema and edema consistent with gastroesophageal reflux disease, bilateral superior surface varicosities, and scars on stroboscopy. No neuromuscular junction abnormalities were noted.
Clinical Studies: Laryngeal electromyogram: mild bilateral superior laryngeal nerve paresis.
Decreased intensity, phonation time, harmonic to noise ratio, acoustic measures, and S/Z ratio.
Diagnosis: Adult-onset laryngeal papillomatosis.
Impairment Rating: 60% to 84% voice/speech impairment; 21% to 30% impairment of the whole person.

Comment: Required two subsequent laryngeal surgeries in attempt to eradicate disease and improve phonatory function. Requires ongoing surveillance by laryngologist for recurrence of papillomas and surveillance for development of laryngeal carcinoma. Requires ongoing voice ther- apy and treatment for reflux disease. Will require personal amplification system to help with vocal projection for job. Vocal prognosis is guarded.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-27
85% to 100% Voice/Speech Impairment


Subject: 38-year-old man.
History: Worked with rubber, plastics, and chemi- cals for 20 years (described as responsible for “everything that blows up”). Suffered inhalation injury from heavy exposure to vinyl chloride fumes due to reactor malfunction. Had micro- laryngoscopy and excision of bilateral vocal fold polyps 1 year after inhalation injury. Voice improved after surgery; remained off work for 6 weeks after operation. Exposed to ammonia fumes 1 month after returning to work.
Experienced immediate dyspnea and sudden and severe hoarseness. Required a second microlaryn- goscopy and vocal fold polypectomy. Became aphonic after 3 days back at work. Required two vocal fold surgeries since initial injury.
Undergoing psychological counseling for stress- related problems secondary to voice problems. Quit smoking.


Current Symptoms: Voice deterioration after using voice and after any exposure to fumes, perfume, smoke, or gasoline; hoarseness associated with shortness of breath; chronic sensation of lump in throat.
Physical Exam: Voice is harsh, hoarse, slightly breathy, and strained. Bilateral vocal fold scar- ring, decreased mucosal wave, hypervascularity, and mucosal irregularities on strobovideolaryn- goscopy.
Clinical Studies: Marked abnormalities in harmonic to noise ratio, shimmer, and maximum flow rate.
Diagnosis: Mucosal vocal fold injury secondary to inhalation of noxious fumes, initially vinyl chlo- ride. Airway hyperactivity that causes dysphonia and dyspnea.
Impairment Rating: 85% to 100% voice/speech impairment; 30% to 35% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Third surgery is recommended. Vocal fold mucosa and voice quality have never returned to normal. Had progressive dysplastic vocal fold changes (leukoplakia) 5 years later. Would be rated class 3 on basis of audibility if in an envi- ronment (such as home) protected from fumes or pollution. However, in activities of daily living, has a class 5 impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 11-28
85% to 100% Voice/Speech Impairment


Subject: 50-year-old man.
History: Had large endolaryngeal tumor without air- way obstruction. Hoarseness for 1 year. Enlarging anterior neck mass for 2 weeks. Dysphagia and 4.5-kg (10-lb) weight loss over 2 months. Forty to 50 pack-year history of smoking. Moderately heavy alcohol user. Underwent total laryngectomy with radical neck dissection and excision of malignant laryngeal cutaneous fistula. Surgery was followed by radiation therapy. Underwent four esophageal dilatations and stomal revisions in preparation for Singer-Blom prosthesis after laryngectomy and radiation therapy. Had submen- tal swelling that required full mouth dental extrac- tion and alveoloplasty. Smokes through tracheostoma. Eats well; weight is stable. Has vir- tually no family to assist him in his care.
Current Symptoms: Unable to speak. Unable to develop esophageal speech or use electrolarynx. Remains totally aphonic.
Physical Exam: No evidence of cancer. Has very dense and deep scarring of neck musculature. Stoma appears epithelialized and open.
Clinical Studies: Four esophageal dilatations. Stoma remains open, but he has not been able to accom- modate Singer-Blom prosthesis.
Diagnosis: Laryngeal cancer; laryngectomy.
Impairment Rating: 85% to 100% voice/speech impairment; 30% to 35% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Altered self-image secondary to disfig- urement from cancer, radical neck surgery, and tracheostomy. Unable to achieve speech with Singer-Blom assistive device or by alternative means. Lacks motivation and dexterity for use of assistive voicing devices due to chronic alcohol abuse.
---END EXAMPLE---

11.5 Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures Impairment Evaluation
	Summary


See Table 11-10 for an evaluation summary for the assessment of impairmnent of the ear, nose, throat, and related structures.


Table 11-10 continued






================================================================================
Chapter 12: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Visual System
12.1 Principles of Assessment
12.2 Impairment of Visual Acuity
12.3 Impairment of the Visual Field
12.4 Impairment of the Visual System
12.5 Visual Acuity Measurement at Near (Reading Acuity)
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairment of the visual system as it affects an individ- ual’s ability to perform activities of daily living. The visual system consists of the eyes and supporting struc- tures, the neural pathways, and the visual cortex of the brain. The visual system is unique in that it
combines the input from two separate eyes into a single visual perception.

This chapter focuses on functional impairment of the visual system as a whole. The impairment ratings in this chapter estimate the severity of the effects of certain types of vision loss on the ability to perform activities of daily living. Changes due to abnormali- ties in the optic nerve or visual cortex are also dis- cussed in Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System.

This chapter has been significantly revised from the fourth edition of the Guides. The revision was based on a consensus within the international community of experts in low vision. Individuals interested in further discussion, including an emphasis on ability, can refer to the Guide for the Evaluation of Visual Impairment, published for the International Society for Low Vision Research and Rehabilitation.12 A summary of revisions follows.


277


1. The Visual Efficiency Scale that was used up to the fourth edition of the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment22, 23 was developed by Snell in 1925.19-21 This scale was replaced with the Functional Vision Score (FVS).17 The FVS pro- vides an estimate of the effect of certain types of vision loss on the ability to perform activities of daily living. On this scale, 20/200 is rated as a 50% impairment.
2. The FVS is based on an assessment of visual acu- ity and visual field. The FVS allows for individual adjustments for other functional deficits, such as contrast and glare sensitivity, color vision, binocu- larity, stereopsis, suppression, and diplopia, if these deficits cause a significant ability loss that is not reflected in a visual acuity or visual field loss.
3. The extra scale and losses for diplopia and aphakia have been removed. Recommendations to make adjustments on an individual basis, if needed, have been added.
4. Near vision measurements are optional; the last section of this chapter contains a discussion on how to make the assessment of reading acuity more accurate.
5. Visual field is recalculated using a new Visual Field Score (VFS). To better account for the func- tional significance of losses in the two lower quadrants, the lower visual field carries 50% more weight than the upper field. Hemianopia is also scored more appropriately.
6. Visual impairment ratings are calculated using the formula (3 ? OU + OD + OS)/5 instead of the prior formula (3 ? better eye + 1 ? lesser eye)/4. The new formula better accounts for situations where the binocular function is not identical to the func- tion of the better eye. This can be particularly important for dissimilar field losses.
7.
This edition also calculates a binocular impair- ment value for visual acuity and for field loss before combining these into an estimate of total visual loss and functional vision.
8. The impairment rating for the visual system = 100 – the FVS.


12.1  Principles of
	Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations.
The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

A permanent visual impairment is defined as a per- manent loss of vision that remains after maximal medical improvement of the underlying medical con- dition has been reached. Ophthalmology has the capability to measure organ functions such as visual acuity and visual field rather precisely. Accordingly, this chapter uses a numerical assessment of visual functions to derive an estimate of their effect on functional vision (ie, on the ability to perform generic activities of daily living). The process is summarized in Table 12-1.


Note that the prefix visual is used when the score refers to each eye. The prefix functional refers to the estimated performance of the individual. The term vision score combines visual acuity and visual field estimates (and individual adjustments, if significant).


12.1 a Steps to Calculate the Visual Impairment Rating
1. Measure visual acuity. Use Table 12-2 to convert each of the measured acuity values to a Visual Acuity Score (VAS).
2. Use Table 12-3 to combine the acuity scores from each eye to determine a single Functional Acuity Score (FAS). Note: If the visual fields are normal and no individual corrections are made, the impairment rating for the visual system is equal to the acuity-related impairment rating (100 – FAS).
3. Measure the visual fields. Use Table 12-5 or the detailed instructions in Section 12.3c to convert each of the measured field values to a Visual Field Score (VFS).
4. Use Table 12-6 to combine the field scores from each eye to determine a single Functional Field Score (FFS).
5. Use the rules in Section 12.4 to combine the Functional Acuity Score and the Functional Field Score to determine a Functional Vision Score (FVS).
6.
Subtract the Functional Vision Score from 100 to obtain the impairment rating for the visual system.
7. If additional visual impairments are not reflected in the reduction of visual acuity or visual field, the examiner may make an adjustment as explained in Section 12.4. The need for such adjustment must be well documented.

The procedure as outlined in Table 12-1 reduces a complex reality to a single number. This number ignores individual differences in adjustment to vision loss. This approach can be helpful for administrative and legal purposes because it does not penalize the individual who has made a good adjustment with a reduction of the impairment rating. By the same token, this approach cannot be used for individual- ized rehabilitation plans. Such plans must be based on an ability profile detailing each of the various skills and abilities of the specific individual. As the rehabilitation proceeds, successful adaptations will reduce further rehabilitation needs. Thus, the ability profile may change while the generic impairment rating will remain the same.


12.1 b Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Subjective symptoms of vision loss usually are the result of objective changes in visual acuity and/or visual field.

Visual acuity describes the ability of the eye to per- ceive details. Visual acuity loss will manifest itself in an inability to perform detail-oriented tasks, such as reading and face recognition. A lay term for visual acuity loss is blurred vision. Visual acuity loss affects many activities of daily living. Although visual acuity is governed by only a small area of the retina (the fovea, the central-most area), it occupies a major part of the visual cortex.

Visual field refers to the ability to detect objects in the periphery of the visual environment. A lay term for peripheral field loss is tunnel vision. Visual field loss will manifest itself in an inability to detect peripheral objects and, often, in a reduced ability to avoid obstacles. The peripheral visual field occupies the largest part of the retina, but it occupies a smaller part of the visual cortex.

Good visual acuity and good visual field are both needed for the performance of daily living skills. A person with tunnel vision may not notice when someone enters the room. A person with visual acu- ity loss, on the other hand, may notice the newcomer but may have difficulty recognizing the person’s face. Once an object has been detected in peripheral vision, central vision will be used to recognize it. A person with a visual field defect (ie, tunnel vision) may not notice a sign on the road or on a wall but could read the sign once found, assuming the indi- vidual had good visual acuity. A person with normal visual fields but a visual acuity loss will detect the sign but will not be able to read it.

Another important function is contrast sensitivity. Whereas visual acuity is generally measured with small objects of high contrast, contrast sensitivity refers to the ability to detect larger objects of poor contrast. This ability is often needed for daily living skills. Facial characteristics are an example of typical low-contrast objects. Contrast sensitivity loss often accompanies visual acuity loss, but it can occur sepa- rately. Because measurement methods for contrast sensitivity are not standardized, this function is not included in the impairment ratings. Where indicated, contrast sensitivity loss that exceeds the effects of the visual acuity loss may be handled as an individ- ual adjustment.

Other symptoms may result from deficits in glare sensitivity, color vision, night vision, binocularity, stereopsis, suppression, and diplopia. If these deficits cause a significant ability loss that is not reflected in a visual acuity or a visual field loss, they may also be handled as adjustments to the impairment rating.


12.1 c Description of Clinical Studies
To obtain the required information, the physician needs to perform a detailed visual assessment, including the cause, severity, and prognosis of the underlying disorder and the expected or documented effects of the vision loss on the ability to perform activities of daily living. Such a visual assessment includes the following.
• Medical history, with particular emphasis on preexisting conditions and treatments and on the major cause of the current vision loss.
• Current condition of the eyes and visual system, with documentation of relevant anatomic findings.
• Visual acuity measurement with best correction, binocularly and for each eye separately. Accurate measurement of distance visual acuity (letter chart acuity) is mandatory; measurement of near acuity (reading acuity) is optional.
• Visual field measurement for each eye.
• Other visual functions, such as contrast sensitivity or color vision, if considered relevant.
• Calculation of an initial impairment rating (visual ability estimate), as detailed in this chapter.
• Other factors that may affect the individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living.
• Discussion (with documentation) of factors that might justify an adjustment of the initial ability estimate and discussion of apportionment considerations, if relevant.

In addition to the equipment needed for a standard ophthalmologic evaluation, the following tools are required for the functional evaluation.
• Standardized letter chart. A lighted chart in a lighted room is preferred because it is more repre- sentative of normal viewing conditions than is a projector chart in a semidark room. Charts with five letters per line, proportional spacing, and a geometric progression of letter sizes are preferred.5-10 For vision in the normal and near- normal ranges, testing at 6 m (20 ft) is recom- mended. For testing in the low-vision range, testing at 1 m is recommended (see Table 12-2). Test charts for this distance are commercially available.24


• Standardized reading tests. Such tests are optional. If performed, they should be standard- ized tests with continuous text segments as speci- fied in the last section of this chapter. A geometric progression of letter sizes is preferred. Letter size designations should be in M-units24 because the implementation of point size and Jaeger numbers has been shown to be inconsistent from chart to chart.
• Visual field equipment. If a restriction of the visual field is claimed or suspected, formal visual field testing on standardized equipment is required. If no visual field restriction is claimed, a confrontation visual field is acceptable to confirm the absence of field restrictions.
• Other functional tests, such as a contrast sensitiv- ity test or glare test, if problems in these areas are reported.
• Samples of actual job-related tasks, if these tasks are different from average reading tasks.


12.2 Impairment of
	Visual Acuity
12.2 a Visual Acuity Notations
Visual acuity is usually recorded as a fraction comparing the individual’s performance to a per- formance standard. If the individual needs letters that are twice as large or twice as close as those needed by a standard eye (ie, 2x angular magnification), the visual acuity is 1/2. If letters are needed that are five times larger or five times closer than those needed by a standard eye, the visual acuity is 1/5, etc. In the United States, it is customary to standardize the numerator at 20. Thus, a visual acuity of 1/2 is recorded as 20/40 and one of 1/5 is recorded as 20/100.


12.2 b Test Procedures
Visual acuity is usually measured with symbols (let- ters, numbers, pictures, or other symbols) presented in a letter chart format. Because visual acuity values can vary widely, the optimum testing distance is not the same for all groups.

12.2b.1 Testing in the Normal Range Individuals in the normal and near-normal range of vision (20/60 or better, ICD-9-CM2, Table 12-2) represent the majority of all patients. The traditional letter charts and projector charts were designed for this group. The most common testing distance is 6 m (20 ft) because at this distance the optical difference with infinity may be ignored. When a printed chart is used, the indicated visual acuity values are valid only if the individual is located at the distance for which the
chart was designed. If a projector chart is used, the individual must be located at the distance for which the projector was adjusted. Charts with a geometric progression of letter sizes, five letters on each row, and letter spacing that is equal to the letter size (often referred to as ETDRS-type charts) are the preferred standard.9, 10

The individual is placed at the distance for which the chart was designed and encouraged to read as far down as possible. The line is considered read when more than half of the characters (eg, three of five) are read correctly. Most charts will indicate the visual acuity level that corresponds to the ability to read each line. When visual acuity is measured in this way, the result should be recorded using the standard US nota- tion (ie, 20/…). The individual should be tested with the best available refractive correction.

When testing for visual acuities around the 20/200 level (legal blindness), the choice of letter chart is particularly important because it affects the assign- ment of benefits. On traditional charts that have no lines between 20/100 and 20/200, the descriptor 20/200 or less becomes, effectively, less than 20/100, so individuals with 20/125 would be recorded as 20/200. On newer charts, 20/200 or less is more appropriately interpreted as less than 20/160. If only an older printed chart is available, the individual can be brought to 10 ft so that less than 20/160 can be interpreted as less than 10/80. The individual with 20/125 (10/63) is then reported appropriately as bet- ter than 20/200. Note that the term legal blindness is a misnomer because 90% of individuals who have 20/200 or less visual acuity are not blind. The term severe vision loss as used in ICD-9-CM should replace the term legal blindness.


12.2b.2 Testing in the Low-Vision Range Use of the Guides will often involve individuals whose visual acuity has dropped to less than 20/60 (ie, to the low-vision range in ICD-9-CM,2 Table 12-2). Individuals in the low-vision range form a
minority of the general population but may represent the majority of those for whom visual impairment evaluations are requested.

Traditional letter charts often have only a few letters for visual acuities worse than 20/100. Such charts are inadequate for the low-vision range and have pro- moted the use of vague statements such as “count fingers” and “hand motions.” More accurate results can be obtained by bringing the chart closer. Testing at 1 m is recommended because it can cover the entire low-vision range, down to 1/50 (20/1000).

When visual acuity is measured at 1 m, it should be recorded as a metric Snellen fraction in which the numerator records the test distance in meters (in this case 1 m, thus 1/…) and the denominator indicates the smallest letter size read in “M-units” (1 M = 1.45 mm = about 1/16 in). The standard US notation may be added in parentheses. Thus, the ability to read 8 M characters at 1 m should be recorded as 1/8 (20/160). Charts with a cord attached and labeled for 1-m testing are available commercially.24


12.2b.3 Correction for Refractive Error
The visual acuity without correction may be reported as part of the general eye examination. The impair- ment ratings should be based on the best-corrected visual acuity. It is important, therefore, to ensure that the refractive correction is appropriate for the testing distance. This is especially true for the short viewing distances used for low-vision individuals. If uncor- rected and best-corrected visual acuity are the same, this should be stated explicitly.

12.2b.4 Monocular vs Binocular Acuity Because binocular viewing represents the most com- mon viewing condition in daily life, the impairment rating should consider the best-corrected binocular visual acuity as well as the best-corrected acuity for each eye separately.

Under most circumstances, best-corrected visual acuity measured binocularly will be determined by the acuity of the better eye. There are exceptions, however. People with latent nystagmus may have better eye stability, and hence better acuity, when viewing binocularly than when one eye is occluded. Some people with diplopia or with distortions in one eye may see better when the poorer eye is occluded.


12.2b.5 Incomplete Data
Whenever possible, determination of an impairment rating should be based on direct examination of the individual. Occasionally, it may be necessary to determine a tentative impairment rating based on chart review, where complete data may not be avail- able. If no better information is obtainable, use the following:
Interpret CF … ft	as	… /200. Interpret CF … m	as	… /60. Interpret HM … ft	as	… /1000. Interpret HM … m	as	… /300.
Therefore, CF 3 ft is interpreted as 3/200, and HM 5 ft is interpreted as 5/1000.


12.2b.6 Use of Realistic Conditions
The evaluation of visual functions should be based on performance under optimal conditions. An excep- tion can be made, however, when the best possible conditions are not feasible in daily life. Examples include individuals who would see better with con- tact lenses but who cannot tolerate them; those with a large interocular difference in refractive error who cannot tolerate full correction of both eyes; and those who can achieve better acuity with an extremely high or extremely low illumination level that cannot be achieved under daily living conditions or in the workplace.

Under these and similar conditions, the evaluation should be based on measurements obtained under realistic daily living conditions. Document why test- ing under suboptimal conditions is most appropriate. When testing multihandicapped individuals, a dis- tinction must be made between failure to see and failure to respond.


12.2 c Steps for Assigning a Visual Acuity–Based Impairment Rating
1. Assign a Visual Acuity Score for each eye. Measure visual acuity as outlined above. Use Table 12-2 to replace the visual acuity value with a score value.


The left part of Table 12-2 lists the ranges of visual acuity loss used in ICD-9-CM.2 At the top of the scale are those with normal vision (20/20 or better), and at the bottom are those who are blind (no light perception). In between are those who have lost part of their vision. This group is said to have low vision (the word vision indicates that they are not blind; the word low indicates that they have less than normal vision). The visual acuity values follow a geometric progression—each line differs from the adjacent lines by a fixed ratio (25%, 10 steps = 10x).

The central part of Table 12-2 lists impairment ratings. This conversion is based on Weber-Fechner’s law, which states that a proportional increase in the stimu- lus corresponds to a linear increase in sensation. The Visual Acuity Score (VAS) has fixed increments (5 points) based on counting 1 point for each letter read on a standard acuity chart with 5 letters per line. The VAS is an ability scale on which higher values indi- cate better function. The impairment rating, which is a scale of ability loss, is obtained by subtracting the VAS from 100. Note that the VAS extends beyond 100 (as does normal visual acuity), but that ability loss is counted only when visual acuity is less than 20/20.

The right part of Table 12-2 lists the estimated impact of visual acuity loss on reading ability. These ranges are based on a general ability scale with the following gradations.17

100 ± 10	Range of normal	Normal function,
                         with reserve capacity 80 ± 10	Mild loss	Normal function, but
(near-normal)	loss of reserve
capacity
60 ± 10	Moderate loss	Normal function, but
                         need for some aids 40 ± 10	Severe loss	Restricted function,
slower than normal, even with aids
20 ± 10	Profound loss	Restricted function,
marginal perform- ance, even with aids
0 ± 10	(Near-) total loss  Cannot perform;
needs substitution skills

The three parts of Table 12-2 fit well with each other. This confirms that the VAS is a reasonable estimate of acuity-related visual abilities and that the impair- ment rating is a reasonable estimate of acuity-related performance loss. If no visual acuity data were obtainable, the right side of Table 12-2 might be used to obtain a very rough impairment estimate.

2. Combine the acuity values.
After the best-corrected visual acuity values for binocular vision (OU), for the right eye (OD), and for the left eye (OS) have been obtained and con- verted to Visual Acuity Scores, these values need to be combined to a single Functional Acuity Score (FAS). The FAS provides an estimate of the ability of the person to perform acuity-dependent daily liv- ing tasks. This is done using Table 12-3.

Note that VAS and FAS may differ. For example, an individual with one blind eye will have a 0 VAS for that eye. However, if the other eye is normal, the FAS will be near-normal, indicating normal performance but loss of reserves (see Examples 12-2 and 12-14).

The acuity-related impairment rating (IR) is calcu- lated by subtracting the FAS from 100. Note that the FAS can be larger than 100 but that the impairment rating is truncated at 0.

3. Consider reading acuity (optional). Determination of reading acuity (near vision) is optional and is explained in more detail in the last section of this chapter. Reading acuity is typically determined binocularly, but it may be determined monocularly if this gives better results.

If reading acuity is significantly worse than letter acuity, the functional acuity score may be adjusted to the average of the letter chart (or distance) acuity score and the reading (or near) acuity score. The probable reason for the discrepancy should be explored and explained.


*Use this table to determine a Visual Acuity Score for each eye. Proceed to Table 12-3 to combine the scores from each eye to a single Functional Acuity Score.
Note: The visual acuity values used in this table follow a strict geometric progression. For clinical use, values such as 20/32 and 20/63 may be rounded to 20/30 and 20/60.


*If visual fields are normal and no individual adjustments are made, the acuity-related impairment rating equals the whole person impairment rating.


*This table assumes that the visual fields are normal and provides general impairment ranges for the listed conditions. Use Tables 12-2 and 12-3 to calculate a more exact impairment rating and to handle cases of visual acuity loss that are not listed. Proceed to Tables 12-5 and 12-6 if visual field loss is present.


12.2d Calculation Examples for Visual Acuity Loss
Note: In the following examples it is assumed that the visual acuity loss is the only deficit. Visual fields and other visual functions are presumed to be normal.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 12-1
15% Impairment Due to Visual Acuity Loss
Subject: 18-year-old man.
History: Driving instructor questioned student’s visual acuity. Student always liked to sit in front of the class to see the blackboard.
Current Symptoms: Has difficulty with distant road signs.
Physical Exam: No ocular abnormalities.
Clinical Studies: Best-corrected acuities: VOU: 20/40, VOD: 20/40, VOS: 20/40.

Visual fields are normal in both eyes; no other deficits in visual functions.

Functional Acuity Score (use Table 12-2 to determine the Visual Acuity Score for each eye; use Table 12-3 to combine the values to a Functional Acuity Score):
Functional Acuity Score	=	425/5 = 85
Diagnosis: Unexplained amblyopia, possibly congenital.
Impairment Rating: 100 – 85 = 15% visual impair- ment.

Comment: This rating places the person in the range of near-normal vision or mild vision loss. Persons in this range can generally function normally, but they need to bring reading material close.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 12-2
16% Impairment Due to Visual Acuity Loss


Subject: 45-year-old woman.
History: Office worker; left eye was enucleated in childhood.
Current Symptoms: Can perform all office functions.
Physical Exam: Left eye replaced by good- fitting prosthesis.
Clinical Studies: Best-corrected acuities: VOU: 20/15, VOD: 20/15, VOS: NLP.
Functional Acuity Score (use Tables 12-2 and 12-3, as above):
VOU  20/15	105 ? 3 =	315
VOD  20/15	105 ? 1 =	105
VOS	NLP	0 ? 1 =	 0
Functional Acuity Score	=	420/5 = 84
Diagnosis: History of retinoblastoma.
Impairment Rating: 100 – 84 = 16% visual impairment.
Comment: Based on visual acuity, this person’s condition is in the near-normal range. The visual field in the left eye is also lost (see Section 12.3). However, because this loss is not independent of the visual acuity loss (see the previous section) and does not exceed the visual acuity–based loss, the Functional Vision Score will still be equal to the Functional Acuity Score (see Example 12-12).
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 12-3
25% Impairment Due to Visual Acuity Loss
Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: Farm worker; scratched the left eye on a branch several years ago.
Current Symptoms: Farm work is OK; no interest in reading or fine crafts.
Physical Exam: Dense corneal scar in OS.
Clinical Studies: Best-corrected acuities: VOU: 20/40, VOD: 20/40, VOS: 20/400.
Functional Acuity Score (use Tables 12-2 and 12-3, as above):
Functional Acuity Score	=	375/5 = 75
Diagnosis: Vision loss due to corneal opacity.
Impairment Rating: 100 – 75 = 25% visual impairment.
Comment: Even though the left eye has much poorer vision than in Example 12-1, this person is still in the range of near-normal vision or mild vision loss. Note that the impairment rating is influenced much more by binocular function than by the function of the lesser eye.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 12-4
36% Impairment Due to Visual Acuity Loss
Subject: 70-year-old woman.
History: Noticed gradual vision loss over several years. Afraid of surgery.
Current Symptoms: Increasing difficulties with reading.
Physical Exam: Early lens opacity OD; dense cataract OS.
Clinical Studies: Best-corrected acuities: VOU: 20/60, VOD: 20/60, VOS: 20/800.
Functional Acuity Score (use Tables 12-2 and 12-3, as above):
Functional Acuity Score	= 320/5 = 64

Diagnosis: Vision loss due to cataract.
Impairment Rating: 100 – 64 = 36% visual impairment.
Comment: Although 20/60 is still in the near-normal range, the very poor condition of the other eye drops the person to the range of moderate vision loss. Persons in this range can perform activities of daily living but may require some aids, such as a hand-held magnifier, to perform detail-oriented tasks, such as reading. If the VOU were not avail- able, assume the VOU = VOD and proceed as above.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 12-5
52% Impairment Due to Visual Acuity Loss


Subject: 25-year-old woman.
History: College student; vision loss since teens.
Current Symptoms: Relies on talking books and videomagnifier for her studies.
Physical Exam: Irregular foveal reflex OU.
Clinical Studies: Best-corrected acuities: VOU: 20/200, VOD: 20/300, VOS: 20/200.
Functional Acuity Score (use Tables 12-2 and 12-3, as above):

Functional Acuity Score	=	240/5 = 48
Diagnosis: Stargardt juvenile maculopathy.
Impairment Rating: 100 – 48 = 52% visual impairment.
Comment: This person is in the range of severe vision loss (sometimes called legal blindness in the United States) and will have limitations in the ability to perform activities of daily living even with aids. Persons in this range need to rely more heavily on assistive devices.
---END EXAMPLE---

12.3 Impairment of the
	Visual Field
12.3a Test Procedures
If no visual field impairment is claimed or suspected (impairment rating = 0), a confrontation visual field may be used to confirm a normal field. In all other circumstances (impairment rating > 0), formal visual field tests should be performed by qualified person- nel according to the instructions provided with the equipment.


12.3a.1 Confrontation Visual Field
This method uses only the examiner’s hands. Seated in front of the individual, the examiner moves his or her hands from the periphery inward to test for the peripheral field limits. This method is an acceptable way to confirm a normal visual field in individuals in whom no field loss is claimed, but it is too gross for detailed evaluation if a field loss is claimed or suspected.


12.3a.2 Tangent Screen Testing
This method uses a black screen on which variously sized objects may be moved. This method is difficult to standardize and loses accuracy beyond 45°. It
is not acceptable for the accurate assessment of permanent impairment.


12.3a.3 Goldmann-Type Testing
The Goldmann visual field equipment provided the first standardized measurement technique. Testing is done in a bowl so that all testing distances are equal while the background and stimulus luminances can be controlled tightly. The usual mode of testing is known as kinetic perimetry because a test stimulus of constant size and intensity is moved by an operator.

The test results are plotted as isopters, contour lines that outline the areas where stimuli of various inten- sity can be perceived. The functional implications of certain isopter patterns are relatively easy to interpret. Agencies, such as the Social Security Administration, often require testing of the Goldmann III4e isopter for eligibility determinations.

12.3a.4 Automated Perimetry
In recent decades, there has been a move from man- ual to automated perimetry. (Commonly used equip- ment includes Humphrey, Octopus, Dicon, and other brands.) This has been accompanied by a move to static perimetry. In static perimetry, the presentations are limited to various fixed locations where stimulus size and intensity are varied.

Automated perimetry results are commonly plotted as a gray scale. Such reports are better suited for automated statistical analysis. They are less intuitive for human interpretation with regard to functional vision. Most clinical tests are limited to the central 30° because this is the most important area for medical diagnostic purposes. For the functional assessment of visual field loss, however, testing to 60° or beyond is mandatory.


12.3a.5 Binocular Fields
Considering both monocular and binocular function is even more important for a functional assessment of the field of vision than it is for visual acuity because intact field areas in one eye may compensate for field loss in the other eye. In cases of asymmetric field loss, the binocular field of view may be substantially better than the field of view of either eye alone.

Direct testing of the binocular visual field presents problems, however, because the amount of conver- gence in a bowl perimeter cannot be monitored and fixation monitoring devices will not work when the head, rather than the eye, is centered. Therefore, the fields of each eye should be measured separately, and a binocular field plot should be derived from the superimposition of the two monocular field plots.


12.3a.6 Tests Used
When Goldmann equipment is used, the III4e isopter should be plotted. If only a larger isopter is available, this isopter may be used (this may result in an under- estimation of the field loss). If only smaller isopters are available, the test cannot be used for impairment evaluation.

If automated equipment is used, a pseudoisopter equivalent to the Goldmann III4e isopter should be constructed (see Example 12-9). On the Humphrey equipment, this would be the isopter for a 10-dB stim- ulus. Plots of the central 30° may only be used when the remaining field radius is smaller than 20° and con- frontation testing indicates no further peripheral vision.


12.3b The Visual Field Score (VFS)
The Visual Field Score (VFS), which is the basis for the calculation of visual field–based impairment rat- ings, parallels the Visual Acuity Score (VAS). The VAS can be determined by counting the letters read correctly on a standardized visual acuity chart.
Similarly, the VFS can be determined by counting the points seen on a standardized visual field grid. The combination rules are also similar.


12.3b.1 Testing Grid
The testing grid is constructed by drawing 10 meridi- ans: 2 in each of the upper quadrants and 3 in each of the lower quadrants. The optimal positions for the 10 meridians are as follows: 25°, 65° (upper right), 115°, 155° (upper left), 195°, 225°, 255° (lower left),
285°, 315°, and 345° (lower right). Along these meridians, 5 points (spaced 2° apart) are assigned to the central 10° and 5 points (spaced 10° apart) are assigned to the periphery beyond 10°; thus, a 60° radius will represent 10 points. The nasal and supe- rior meridians may not reach 60°, but the lateral field will extend further. Thus, the average normal field will score about 100 points.

Figure 12-1 summarizes the point assignments. The circle represents a 10° radius.

This arrangement has the following effects:
• The visual field score for the central 10° is 50 points. This reflects that the central 10° of the visual field correspond to 50% of the primary visual cortex. This also maintains the traditional assumption that a visual field loss to a 10° radius is equally disabling as a visual acuity loss to 20/200.
• Choosing the measured meridians within the quadrants rather than along the horizontal and vertical meridians avoids the need for special rules for hemianopias.
• A complete homonymous hemianopia receives a 50-point score. This implies that it is considered equally disabling as a field restriction to a 10° radius or as a visual acuity loss to 20/200.
• Choosing 3 meridians in the lower quadrants and 2 in the upper ones acknowledges the functional importance of the lower field by giving it 50% extra weight.
• ICD-9-CM defines severe, profound, and near- total visual field loss as concentric restriction to a 10°, 5°, and 2.5° field radius.2 These categories fit the VFS scale.

The VFS is summarized in Table 12-5, which is similar to Table 12-2 in organization.

Use Table 12-5 or the detailed rules in Section 12.3c to determine a Visual Field Score for each eye.
Proceed to Table 12-6 to combine the scores from each eye to determine a single Functional Field Score.


*This table follows the clinical usage of describing field losses on the basis of the remaining radius. In the rehabilitation and disability literature, field losses are often described on the basis of the remaining diameter (eg, a concentric field loss to a radius of 10° leaves a field with a diameter of 20°).


*This table assumes that the visual acuity is still normal. It can be used to determine the general impairment range for the listed conditions. Use Tables 12-5 and 12-6 or the detailed rules in Section 12.3c to calculate a more exact figure and to handle other visual field loss. Use Tables 12-2 and 12-3 if visual acuity loss is present.


12.3c Assigning a Field-Based Impairment Rating
Calculation of a visual field–based impairment rating requires the following steps.

1. Determine the extent of the visual field for each eye. If Goldmann visual field plots are available, deter- mine the III4e isopter for each eye. If only automated visual field plots are available, determine a pseudoisopter by drawing a line surrounding all points with a sensitivity of 10 dB or better, excluding points with < 10-dB sensitivity. If automated field plots are used, these should be full-field plots (Humphrey 60-2 or the equivalent). The 30° plot may be used only if confrontation testing has deter- mined that there are no peripheral islands of vision and if a 30° central field plot (Humphrey 30-2 or the equivalent) shows that there is no vision beyond 20°.
2.
Determine the Visual Field Score for each eye. Use the pattern explained in Figure 12-1. This pat- tern can be implemented in several ways, explained below.

2.a. Paper and pencil
Starting with a visual field plot of the III4e isopter (or the equivalent), draw 10 meridians, 2 in each upper quadrant and 3 in each lower quadrant. To space the meridians evenly, use the following approximate positions: 25°, 65° (upper right), 115°,
155° (upper left), 195°, 225°, 255° (lower left), 285°,
315°, and 345° (lower right).

Determine the extent of each meridian. Within 10° from fixation, round to the nearest 2° value; outside 10° round to the nearest 10° value. Convert the rounded extent to a subscore using Table 12-8.


If a scotoma interrupts the meridian, round the extent of the scotoma to the nearest 2° or 10° value and subtract the corresponding point value. In the pres- ence of scotomata, use of the overlay grid is the preferred method.

Add the 10 subscores to obtain the VFS for that eye. The average normal field will score about 100 points.

2.b. Overlay grid
Create an overlay grid with 10 meridians (see step 2.a) and grid points on each meridian at 1°, 3°, 5°, 7°, 9°, 15°, 25°, 35°, 45°, 55°, and 65°. Place the
overlay grid over the field plot. Count the grid points enclosed by the III4e isopter (or the equiva- lent). Grid points within scotomata should not be counted. The total number of points seen is the Visual Field Score (VFS).

2.c. Automated calculation
A pilot study in 1992 conducted with a Humphrey Field Analyzer and controlled by an IBM-PC has shown the feasibility of a fully automated test sequence using the points of the overlay grid as stim- ulus positions.16 Such a program is not yet available commercially.

3. Determine the Functional Field Score (FFS). Determine the binocular field by superimposing the monocular fields. For the binocular field, points are counted as seen if seen by both eyes or by one of the eyes. This determines the binocular VFS.

Combine the Visual Field Scores for OU, OD, and OS (see Table 12-6):
12.3
d Calculation Examples for Visual Field Loss
The following examples calculate the Visual Field Score for a single eye. This calculation needs to be followed by the same calculation for the other eye and for the binocular field (see Examples12-10 and
12-11). Finally, use Table 12-6 to combine these values to determine a Functional Field Score.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 12-6
0% Impairment Due to Visual Field Loss


Request: Determine the Visual Field Score for an eye with the following Goldmann III4e isopter.
Method 1: Draw 10 meridians (see instruction 2.a in section 12.3c).
Measure the extent in degrees of each meridian.
Use Table 12-8 to convert the extents to sub- scores.
Add the subscores: (10 + 9) + (9 + 11) + (11 + 11
+ 11) + (10 + 9 + 9) = 100.

FFS = (3 ? VFS

+ VFS  + VFS

)/5.

OU	OD	OS

4. The visual field–based impairment rating is 100 – FFS.


Method 2: Create an overlay grid (see instructions in Section 12.3c).
Count the points within the III4e isopter. The dia- gram has 100 solid dots within the 60° circle and 8 open dots outside. The score is easily counted as: 100 – solid dots missed (symbol ?) + open dots seen (symbol heavy ). For this field plot: FFS = 100 – 4 + 4 = 100.
Comment: The Visual Field Score is 100; therefore, the impairment rating is 0%. Note that the extra points seen laterally compensate for the points missed nasally and superiorly.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 12-7
18% Impairment Due to Visual Field Loss

Request: Determine the Visual Field Score for an individual with a midperipheral ring scotoma due to early RP. The central field is not affected. The Goldmann III4e isopter is as indicated.
Method 1: Determine the peripheral field limits and the peripheral subscore as in Example 12-6.
(For simplicity, the peripheral score is kept the same.)
Determine the extent of the scotoma in each of the sample meridians.
Subtract the amounts indicated in Table 12-8. The Visual Field Score is 90.


Method 2: Using the overlay grid as in Example
12-6, do not count the 18 points within the scotoma.
Comment: The Visual Field Score is reduced by 18 points from 100 to 82 (18% impairment). This places the individual in the near-normal range.
Because the scotoma is in the midperiphery, cen- tral vision is not affected and far peripheral vision still warns of obstacles. Thus, the effect on daily living skills is relatively minor. The effect on the whole person depends on the exact condition of the other eye.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 12-8
20% Impairment Due to Visual Field Loss

This individual has a juxtafoveal scotoma due to early macular degeneration. Letter chart acuity is still unaffected.
Request: Determine the Visual Field Score.
Method 1: Subtract points from each meridian as indicated in Figure 12-6.
100 – 20 = 80 (20% impairment).


Method 2: Subtract the solid dots that are not seen (see Figure 12-7).
100 – 20 = 80 (20% impairment).
Comment: Although this scotoma is far smaller than the one in the previous example, it will signifi- cantly interfere with reading and similar tasks.
This justifies a significant decrease of the Functional Field Score and a corresponding increase in the impairment rating. (See also Examples 12-13 and 12-14.)
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 12-9
72% Impairment Due to Visual Field Loss


A Goldmann visual field test is not available for this individual. Automated static perimetry has been per- formed with the result indicated in Figure 12-8.


Follow these steps:
1. Construct a pseudoisopter around the points with better than 10-dB sensitivity.
2. Measure the extent in the 10 meridians. If this is a Humphrey 30-2 plot, the test points are 6° apart. The subscores are shown in Figure 12-9.


The Visual Field Score is 28. The field-related impairment rating is 100 – 28 = 72.

Comment: This may be a case of advanced retinitis pigmentosa. The automated field test did not test points beyond 30° from fixation. The calculated Visual Field Score is acceptable only if there is additional evidence that there is no further periph- eral vision. A full-field automated test is pre- ferred. In the absence of such a test and in advanced cases like this one, evidence from a con- frontation visual field may be acceptable.
---END EXAMPLE---

12.3e Calculating the Binocular Field Existing perimeters are not equipped to provide reli- able measurements of the binocular visual field.
Therefore, the binocular visual field is constructed by superimposing the two monocular plots. On the superimposed plot, areas seen by either eye are counted as seen; only areas not seen by either eye are counted as defects. The resulting binocular score can vary dramatically, depending on the location of the defects.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 12-10
2% Impairment With Consideration of Binocular Visual Field Loss

An individual has a nasal defect in the left eye. The right eye is normal (see Figure 12-10).
Visual Field Score: Visual Field Score, using the overlay grid (100 – solid dots missed + open dots seen).
OS: 100 – 24 + 3 =	79
OU: 100 –  2 + 7 = 105 ? 3 = 315
OD:	100
494 / 5 = 99
(1% impairment rating)
Comment: Because the defect in the left eye corre- sponds to a seeing area of the right eye, the sco- toma is not counted in the binocular plot. Because the binocular field carries 60% of the weight of the Functional Field Score, the Functional Field Score is affected little.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 12-11
4% Impairment With Consideration of Binocular Visual Field Loss

An individual has a temporal defect in the left eye (see Figure 12-11).
Visual Field Score: Visual Field Score, using the overlay grid (100 – solid dots missed + open dots seen).
OS: 100 – 20 =	80
OU: 100 – 4 + 4 = 100 ? 3 = 300
OD:	100
380 / 5 = 96
(4% impairment rating)
Comment: Because the temporal defect in the left eye extends beyond the area seen by the right eye, both the left eye score and the binocular score are affected. Thus, the Functional Field Score is affected more than in Example 12-10.
---END EXAMPLE---

12.4 Impairment of the
	Visual System
The preceding calculations have provided us with two separate impairment estimates. The FAS pro- vides an estimate for visual acuity–related abilities, such as reading, while the FFS provides an estimate for visual field–related abilities, such as orientation and mobility. To obtain an overall estimate of visual impairment, the two impairment estimates must be combined to a single Functional Vision Score (FVS). Subtracting the FVS from 100 then provides the visual impairment rating for the visual system.
See below (Section 12.4c, Table 12-10) for the whole person impairment rating.

Because the calculations outlined so far consider only the visual acuity and visual field aspects of vision, there must be room for individual adjust- ments in cases where functional vision is limited by factors other than visual acuity and visual field. The procedure was summarized in Table 12-1.


12.4a Calculating an Impairment Rating for the Visual System
The FAS and the FFS were calculated as weighted averages. This is appropriate because a good visual acuity or good visual field in one eye can compensate for loss of the same function in the other eye. Visual acuity–related functions and visual field–related functions, however, are largely independent. Good visual acuity cannot compensate for a loss of visual field, and vice versa. Therefore, the FAS and the FFS are combined using a multiplication formula.


12.4a.1 Basic Rule
To calculate the FVS, the FAS and the FFS are multiplied as if they represented percentage scores:
FVS = (FAS ? FFS)/100
For example, if the FAS is 80 (a 20% impairment) and the FFS is 75 (a 25% impairment), the FVS is calcu- lated as: 80% ? 75% = 60% (a 40% impairment).

Note that this calculation can be performed only on the basis of the residual ability scores. Adding or multiplying the impairment ratings (which indicate ability loss) gives erroneous answers.

12.4a.2 Additional Rules
Some additional rules are needed to avoid unrealistic calculations.
1. For the purpose of this calculation, Functional Acuity and Functional Field Scores that are > 100 are treated as if they were 100. Thus, losses are counted only if the performance drops below the performance standard. The average performance of healthy eyes often is better than the perform- ance standard. This better performance is taken into account in calculating the Functional Scores (see Example 12-2), but it is not counted as a reduction of the impairment rating.
2. If visual field data are not available and if there is no clinical reason to suspect visual field loss, the FFS may be assumed to be 100. In this case, the FVS is the same as the FAS, and the impairment rating for the visual system is the same as the impairment rating for the visual acuity loss.


12.4a.3 Rule for Central Scotomata (Field Loss and Acuity Loss Are Not Independent) The dense array of points in the central 10° area of the visual field grid means that paracentral scotomata (blind spots adjacent to the point of fixation) will be counted even if they do not affect the central acuity. This is appropriate because it has been shown that such scotomata can interfere significantly with read- ing ability and with other activities of daily living.

However, if the scotoma is central (ie, it covers the point of fixation), it affects both visual acuity and visual field and the two impairment ratings can no longer be treated as independent. Using the basic for- mula, central scotomata would be counted twice: once through their effect on visual acuity and once through their effect on the central field. Therefore, an additional rule is needed.

3. If visual acuity is reduced, some central visual field losses will not be counted, as specified in Table 12-9.

Thus, for every 10 points of VAS loss, field losses in one ring of 10 grid points are ignored. This means that these points are counted as if they were seen.
This adjustment is made for each eye separately. The effect of this rule is that individuals with a small island of good acuity within a pericentral scotoma will get credit for this scotoma, but that those with a central scotoma that affects visual acuity will not get double benefits. The adjustment does not affect peripheral field losses. Thus, a person with periph- eral field loss due to glaucoma who also develops a


central loss due to macular degeneration will get credit for the central loss as well as for the peripheral field loss (see Examples 12-13, 12-14, and 12-15).


12.4b Individual Adjustments
Although visual acuity loss and visual field loss rep- resent significant aspects of visual impairment, they are not the only factors that can lead to a loss of functional vision. This edition of the Guides does not provide detailed scales for other functions, such as:

• Contrast sensitivity. This is the ability to perceive larger objects of poor contrast. Loss of this ability can interfere significantly with many activities of daily living. It is often, but not always, associated with a loss of visual acuity.
• Glare sensitivity (veiling glare), delayed glare recovery, photophobia (light sensitivity), and reduced or delayed light and dark adaptation. These are other functions that may interfere with proper contrast perception.
• Color vision defects. These defects are not uncom- mon but usually do not interfere significantly with generic activities of daily living. Severe color vision defects (achromatopsia) are usually accom- panied by visual acuity loss. In some vocational settings the impact of minor color vision deficien- cies can be significant. This could be a case where the generic impairment rating does not reflect the job-specific employability rating.
• Binocularity, stereopsis, suppression, and diplopia. These functions vary in their effect on activities of daily living. Their significance often depends on the environment and on vocational demands.

Standardized measurement techniques on which standardized ability estimates can be based have not yet been developed for most of these functions.
Furthermore, their effect may be partially accounted for by a loss of visual acuity and may vary signifi- cantly according to environmental demands.

If significant factors remain that affect functional vision and that are not accounted for through visual acuity or visual field loss, a further adjustment of the impairment rating of the visual system may be in order. The need for the adjustment, however, must be well documented. The adjustment should be limited to an increase in the impairment rating of the visual system (reduction of the FVS) by, at most, 15 points.

The same rule should be observed as in the case of central scotomata: Deficits should only be counted to the extent that their effect exceeds the effect of the related visual acuity or visual field deficit. Note the following examples.
1. An individual with a congenital dark adaptation deficit with normal acuity and normal fields may be given a limited impairment rating based on this deficit. In someone with rod dystrophy (RP) man- ifested by field loss as well as dark adaptation problems, the impairment rating will be deter- mined by the field loss and no additional rating is given for the dark adaptation deficit.
2. Most people with visual acuity loss due to macular degeneration also have a loss of contrast sensitiv- ity. Because the impairment rating is dominated by the visual acuity loss, no additional rating is given for the contrast sensitivity loss. Occasionally, indi- viduals will have a bothersome contrast sensitivity loss while the visual acuity is still normal. In these cases, a limited impairment rating may be given based on the contrast sensitivity loss.
3. Minor color vision deficits exist in about 5% of males. These deficits do not interfere with generic activities of daily living and do not receive an impairment rating. A printer with such a deficit would have no problems with black-and-white printing, but he or she may have difficulty judging the accuracy of color prints. This is a deficit that affects employability in a specific job, but it does not enter into the generic impairment considera- tions in this chapter (see Chapters 1 and 2). Total color blindness (achromatopsia) is extremely rare. It is accompanied by visual acuity loss, in which case the visual acuity loss will determine the impairment rating.


12.4c Impairment of the Whole Person In classes 1, 2, and 3, individuals may benefit from vision enhancement techniques such as large print,
better illumination, and better contrast. In classes 4, 5, and 6, a shift to vision substitution techniques occurs; this may include talking books, Braille, long cane, etc. Because of these techniques, a totally blind per- son is not totally incapacitated. In the previous sec- tion, a downward adjustment of the Functional Vision Score of up to 15 points was allowed for additional impairments whose effect exceeds that of the visual acuity and/or visual field loss. A similar, but opposite, adjustment may be made in classes 4, 5, and 6 to account for the effects of vision substitution skills that alleviate the effects of the permanent vision loss.

This adjustment affects the translation of the impair- ment rating of the visual system to an impairment rat- ing of the whole person as shown in Table 12-10. Since the effectiveness of vision substitution skills will vary from person to person and cannot be predicted from the visual acuity and visual field measurements, the adjustments in Table 12-10 are generalized estimates.

That the whole person impairment rating is not reduced further, even for blind persons who have made very effective adjustments, reflects the fact that vision substitution skills alleviate the effects of vision loss but do not eliminate the vision loss itself.


12.4 d Calculation Examples Combining Visual Acuity Loss and Visual Field Loss

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 12-12 (See also Example 12-2)
16% Impairment Due to Visual Acuity Loss Combined With Visual Field Loss

Subject: 45-year-old woman.
History: As stated in Example 12-2, the individual lost the left eye (enucleated in childhood); the right eye is normal.
Current Symptoms: Can perform all office functions.

Physical Exam: Left eye replaced by good-fitting prosthesis.


* The examples in this table refer to visual acuity loss alone or to visual field loss alone. Use Tables 12-2, 12-3, 12-5, and 12-6 and the rules in this section to calculate an impairment value when there is both visual acuity loss and visual field loss. If VSI ? 50%, WPI = VSI. If VSI > 50%, WPI is adjusted based on the formula WPI = 50 + 0.7 ? (VSI – 50).


Clinical Studies: Best-corrected acuities: VOU: 20/15, VOD: 20/15, VOS: NLP.
Functional Acuity Score: 84 (as calculated in Example 12-2).
Functional Field Score:
Field OD	full field	100 ? 1 =100
Field OS	no field	0 ? 1 =	0
Field OU	full field	100 ? 3 = 300 Functional Field Score		400/5 = 80
Functional Vision Score: In this case, the visual acuity loss and the visual field loss are not inde- pendent. Multiplying the two ratings, FAS ? FFS/100 ? (84 ? 80)/100 = 67, would count the same deficit twice. Because the field loss includes the point of fixation, the rule for central scotomata applies. Because the 100% field loss in the left eye does not exceed the 100% visual acuity loss in that eye, the field loss is ignored for the FVS calculation (counted as FFS = 100, ie, 0% impair- ment). The Functional Vision Score thus equals the Functional Acuity Score. The Functional Vision Score = (84 ? 100)/100 = 84.
Diagnosis: History of retinoblastoma.
Impairment Rating: 100 – 84 = 16% impairment of the visual system, which is also the impairment of the whole person (see Table 12-10).
Comment: The loss of one eye reduces the Functional Vision Score to the near-normal range, indicating a significant loss of reserves but not a significant restriction of the ability to perform activities of daily living.
Note: To simplify the presentation of the following cases, the assumption is made that both eyes have identical conditions so that the Functional Acuity and Field Scores equal the Visual Acuity and Field Scores of the eye that is discussed. In real cases there usually will be differences in the scores.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 12-13
16% Impairment Due to Perifoveal Visual Field Loss

Subject: 65-year-old man.
History: No prior history of eye disease.
Current Symptoms: Reading is no longer enjoyable.
Physical Exam: Atrophic macular degeneration (geographic atrophy).
Clinical Studies: Best-corrected acuities: VOU: 20/20, VOD: 20/20, and VOS: 20/20.
Visual field studies reveal a central island of good foveal vision surrounded by a scotoma; beyond this scotoma the peripheral field is normal.

Functional Acuity Score: Normal visual acuity means Functional Acuity Score = 100.
Functional Field Score: The grid points at 3° and 5° are missed in all 10 meridians (20 points lost). The Visual Field Score is 100 – 10 ? 2 = 80.
Functional Vision Score: Because the field loss does not include the center of fixation, the rule for central scotomata does not apply. The Functional Vision Score is
FAS ? FFS/100 ? 100 ? 80/100 = 80.
Diagnosis: Age-related maculopathy.
Impairment Rating: 100 – 80 = 20% impairment of the visual system, which is also the impairment of the whole person (see Table 12-10).
Comment: The impairment rating reflects the signif- icant effect of a perifoveal scotoma on reading ability and other daily living skills. Without the perifoveal scotoma, the impairment would have been 0%.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 12-14
45% Impairment Due to Visual Acuity Loss Combined With Visual Field Loss

Subject: 68-year-old man described in Example 12-13.
History: Prior history of macular degeneration.
Current Symptoms: Has lost the central island of his vision. Reading is possible only with a strong magnifier.
Physical Exam: Progressive macular degeneration, now including the foveal area.
Clinical Studies:
Functional Acuity Score: Visual acuity dropped to 20/160. The Visual Acuity Score, considered alone, is 20/160 = 55 (45% impairment rating).
Functional Field Score: All grid points at 1°, 3°, and 5° are lost. The Visual Field Score, considered alone, is 100 – 10 ? 3 = 70 (30% impairment rating).
Functional Vision Score: Because the field loss now includes the center of fixation, the rule for central scotomata applies. For the calculation of the Functional Vision Score, the central field loss of 30% is ignored because it does not exceed the 45% visual acuity loss. Therefore, the Functional Field Score is entered into the calculation as if it were 100. The calculation is: FAS ? FFS/100 ? 55 ? 100/100 = 55.
Diagnosis: Progressive age-related maculopathy.


Impairment Rating: 100 – 55 = 45% impairment of the visual system, which is also the impairment of the whole person (see Table 12-10).
Comment: In Example 12-13, the impairment rating was determined by the visual field loss. In this case, the visual acuity loss dominates.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example12-15
59% Impairment Due to Visual Acuity Loss Combined With Visual Field Loss

Subject: 75-year-old man described in Examples 12-13 and 12-14.
History: Prior history of macular degeneration. In recent years the individual has also been followed for glaucoma.
Current Symptoms: Reading remains possible with a strong magnifier, but the individual complains of being startled by objects in his peripheral vision.
Physical Exam: The macular degeneration appears stationary. The optic disc shows cupping.
Clinical Studies:
Functional Acuity Score: The Visual Acuity Score is still 20/160 = 55 (45% impairment rating).
Functional Field Score: In addition to the 30 cen- tral points, 25 peripheral points are now lost. The Visual Field Score, considered alone, is 100 – 30 (central loss) – 25 = 45 (55% impairment rating).
Functional Vision Score: Although the visual field loss alone (55%) is worse than the visual acuity loss alone (45%), for the calculation of the Functional Vision Score the central field loss is ignored since this part of the vision loss is already accounted for in the visual acuity impairment rat- ing (see Table 12-9 and the example above). The peripheral field loss, which is independent of the visual acuity loss, is not ignored. Therefore, the Functional Field Score is now entered into the cal- culation as if it were 100 – 25 = 75. Therefore: FVS = FAS ? FFS/100 ? 55 ? 75/100 = 41 (59%
impairment rating).
Diagnosis: Age-related maculopathy. Chronic open- angle glaucoma.
Impairment Rating: 100 – 41 = 59% impairment of the visual system, which might be rated as 56% impairment of the whole person (see Table 12-10).
Comment: The impairment rating is now affected by the visual acuity loss as well as by the peripheral field loss.
---END EXAMPLE---
12.5 Visual Acuity Measurement at Near
	(Reading Acuity)
Consideration of reading acuity in the calculation of the FAS is optional. It is warranted only if the reading acuity is significantly different from the distance acu- ity. In that case, it is appropriate to use the average of the FAS for letter chart acuity and the FAS for read- ing as indicated in Table 12-11. This section contains instructions for accurate reading acuity measurement.


12.5 a Near Acuity vs Distance Acuity (Reading Acuity vs Letter Chart Acuity) Near acuity may be measured with a reduced-size letter chart or with continuous text. When the objec- tive is the assessment of functional vision—as is the purpose of the Guides—continuous textual reading material should be used.

Under most circumstances, letter chart acuity and reading acuity—if measured appropriately and with the proper refractive correction—will be similar.
If significant differences between reading acuity and letter chart acuity exist, measurement errors,
inappropriate refractive correction, and/or other com- plicating factors should first be suspected. The nature of these factors needs to be explored, documented, and corrected where possible. Accurate calculation of the reading acuity requires accurate measurement of the letter size as well as the viewing distance. Many practitioners record only the letter size read and not the reading distance. Table 12-11 shows that this is inappropriate because small changes in the reading distance can result in significant changes in visual acuity, especially if the reading distance is short.

One cause of a true discrepancy between reading acuity and letter chart acuity might be that the indi- vidual uses a small central island within a ring sco- toma for letter acuity while using a larger, more eccentric area for reading. Another cause might be that when measuring letter chart acuity, people are usually pushed for threshold or marginal perform- ance, whereas reading tests more often aim at a level of comfortable performance. For this reason, the magnification requirement for reading acuity may be somewhat greater than that for letter acuity. The dif- ference is known as the magnification reserve needed for reading fluency.


12.5b Letter Size Notations
Another reason for discrepancies can be found in the use of inaccurate letter size notations. The com- monly used Jaeger numbers refer to the labels on the boxes in the printing house in Vienna where Jaeger selected his print samples. They have no numerical value, and their implementation on various reading cards is notoriously variable. The J-numbers listed in Table 12-11 present the range of J-designations found for each letter size when a number of reading cards were surveyed.

Some charts use a notation in printer’s points. Point sizes have a numerical value but may vary depending on the type style used. Many reading cards list dis- tance equivalents. This notation is valid only if the card is used at the distance for which the card was designed. At any other distance, the use of distance equivalents is utterly confusing.

The only letter size unit that allows a comparison between letter chart acuity and reading acuity is the M-unit. M-units refer directly to the actual letter size (X-height for uppercase letters on a letter chart, x- height for lowercase letters in a reading segment).
One M-unit subtends 5 minutes of arc at 1 m and equals 1.454 mm (10% less than 1/16 in).


12.5c Measurement Guidelines for Reading Acuity (Near-Vision Acuity) Visual acuity measurement at near is more complex than visual acuity measurement at distance because
both letter size and viewing distance can vary. When reading acuity is measured, follow these guidelines.
If binocular reading is possible, the binocular read- ing acuity should be recorded. If binocular reading is not possible or not preferred, the reading acuity of the eye that is preferred for actual reading should be

1/16 in. Measuring the letter size in units of 1/16 in overestimates the visual acuity by slightly less than half a standard step size.

To test reading acuity for the normal and near-normal range, many cards are available. Most will indicate distance equivalents. Note that these distance equiva- lents are valid only if the designated distance is used.

Many individuals undergoing impairment evaluation will fall in the low-vision range. They may require shorter reading distances and/or larger print sizes.
Table 12-11 shows the proper visual acuity values and impairment ratings for many combinations of letter size and viewing distance.


12.5d Modified Snellen Formula
The visual acuity values found in Table 12-11 could be calculated using the standard Snellen fraction V = m/M, in which the viewing distance is specified in meters (1 m = 100 cm = 40 in, 1 in = 2.5 cm) and the letter size is in M-units. Use of the standard Snellen fraction becomes awkward when the viewing dis- tance (in meters) is itself a fraction. In this case, it is more convenient to use the reciprocal of the viewing distance, which is known as the diopter (2 diopters = 1/2 m, 5 D = 1/5 m, etc). The use of reciprocal val- ues turns the Snellen fraction into a multiplication, which is more easily calculated in one’s head because it uses whole numbers instead of fractions within fractions.

The traditional formula
    m V = —
M
thus becomes
1/V = M = M ? 1 = M ? D,

m	m

used.

The measurement of reading acuity requires a read- ing card with calibrated reading segments. Cards with proportionally spaced segments of equal length are preferred. The preferred step size is the same as for letter charts. The viewing distance should be measured and recorded carefully. Measurement with a diopter ruler simplifies calculations (see Section 12.5d) and provides a direct comparison to the required accommodation or reading add. Letter size specification in M-units is mandatory if any calcula- tions or comparisons are involved. One M-unit equals 1.454 mm, which is slightly smaller than

where M = letter size in M-units, m = viewing dis- tance in meters, and D = viewing distance in diopters.


12.5e Instructions
To find the optimal combination of reading distance and letter size, start at the reading distance that cor- responds to the individual’s current reading add and/or accommodative power. Increase the reading add (reduce the reading distance) to reach smaller print. Using Table 12-11, find the visual acuity at the intersection of the letter size row and the reading dis- tance column. Alternatively, using the M ? D for- mula and a diopter ruler, calculate the 1/V value.


For each combination of viewing distance and letter size read, compare the reading add to the viewing distance in diopters to verify the appropriate refrac- tive correction. Also, compare the M ? D value to verify that the visual acuity values are consistent.

12.5f Correction of Refractive Error
To verify that the refractive correction is appropriate for the viewing distance, it is often useful to ask the individual to move the card back and forth to find the best possible focus. If the refractive correction (read- ing add) is not optimal, the measured acuity will not be the best-corrected visual acuity. Measuring the reading distance in diopters has the advantage of easy comparison to the reading addition.


* Columns indicate reading distances. Rows indicate letter sizes. The resulting reading acuity ratings are found at the intersections. The large number in each box represents the impairment rating (100 – Visual Acuity Score, truncated at 0 and at 100). The small number represents the Snellen distance equivalent. Note that the visual acuity values and impairment ratings are arranged in diagonal bands. The same visual acuity value can be represented by many different combinations of viewing distance and letter size. The outer edge of the table indicates the ranges of vision loss for each diagonal band in ICD-9-CM.






================================================================================
Chapter 13: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Central and Peripheral Nervous System
13.1 Principles of Assessment
13.2 Criteria for Rating Impairments Due to Central Nervous System Disorders
13.3 Criteria for Rating Cerebral Impairments
13.4 Criteria for Rating Impairments of the Cranial Nerves
13.5 Criteria for Rating Impairments of Station, Gait, and Movement Disorders
13.6 Criteria for Rating Impairments of Upper Extremities Related to Central Impairment
13.7 Criteria for Rating Spinal Cord and Related Impairments
13.8 Criteria for Rating Impairments Related to Chronic Pain
13.9 Criteria for Rating Impairments of the Peripheral Nervous System, Neuromuscular Junction, and Muscular System
13.10 Nervous System Impairment Evaluation Summary
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating perma- nent impairments due to documented dysfunction of the brain, cranial nerves, spinal cord, nerve roots, and/or peripheral nerves and muscles.

The following revisions have been made for the fifth edition: (1) an impairment evaluation summary is provided at the end of the chapter to allow easy access to the neurologic impairment in question; (2) a description of ancillary tests with some of their indi- cations provides an understanding of abnormalities found on the neurologic examination; (3) there is more guidance in the assessment of cognition, gait and movement disorders, and cranial nerve disorders; and (4) additional cases are included to illustrate each area of impairment.

13.1 Principles of
	Assessment
This chapter emphasizes the deficits or impairments that may be identified during a neurologic evaluation.


305


For some nervous system impairments listed, hand dominance is critical to determine the degree of impairment. To evaluate distal nerve traumatic injury, refer to Chapter 16, The Upper Extremities. Because neurologic impairments are intimately related to men- tal and emotional processes and their functioning, the examiner should also understand Chapters 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders, and 18, Pain (pain has been accounted for in neurologic-based impairment ratings). Additional impairments based on those chapters may need to be considered.

Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for per- forming and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluations.

A permanent neurologic impairment is any anatomic, physiological, or functional abnormality or loss that remains after maximum medical improvement (MMI). Impairment rating criteria for neurologic impairments include an assessment of the ability
to perform activities of daily living, as listed in Table 1-2. These limitations may involve physical performance (eg, walking, climbing, lifting, finger dexterity) or mental performance (eg, cognition
or communication).

If impairments involve several nervous system areas (eg, the brain, spinal cord, and/or peripheral nerves), calculate separate whole person impairment ratings for each area and combine them using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604). As discussed in the following text, impairment of the brain is assessed differently. Because brain dysfunction will likely affect many overlapping functions, identify the most severe cere- bral impairment. The impairment rating is based on the neurologic condition that causes the most severe impairment. Examples are provided later in the chapter.


13.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
Nervous system disorders can present with general- ized or focal symptoms. Symptoms may include alterations in level of consciousness, confusion, memory loss, difficulties with language, headache, visual blurring, double vision, fatigue, facial pain and weakness, ringing in the ears, dizziness, vertigo, difficulty swallowing or speaking, weakness of one or multiple limbs, difficulty walking or climbing

stairs, shooting pain, numbness and tingling in the extremities, tremor, loss of coordination, loss of bladder or rectal control, and sexual dysfunction. Note that many of these symptoms describe the func- tional impairment experienced by the individual. The neurologic evaluation and ancillary clinical testing determine the origin of these symptoms. Difficulty walking, for example, may result from problems in different areas of the central and/or peripheral nerv- ous system. The neurologic examination may find a spastic paraparesis associated with a spinal cord lesion. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine may show the etiology to be demyelinating plaques that also may show abnormal somatosensory evoked response since the pathway travels through the areas of demyelination in the spinal cord.

Some impairment classes refer directly to limitations in the ability to perform activities of daily living because of symptoms. When this information is sub- jective and open to misinterpretation, it should not serve as the sole criterion upon which decisions about impairment are made. Rather, obtain objective data about the severity of the findings and the limita- tions and integrate those findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent impairment.


13.1b Description of Clinical Studies:
A detailed neurologic examination enables the physi- cian to identify the location of nervous system impairment. The purpose of ancillary testing is to assess the severity and location of the lesion and confirm the underlying pathology. It is important to remember that an abnormality found on ancillary testing (anatomic or physiologic) is an impairment but is not necessarily assigned an impairment rating if functions needed for activities of daily living are not affected. The nervous system is able to compen- sate for a variety of lesions due to its plasticity and redundancy, sometimes resulting in limited represen- tation on the neurologic examination.

Common clinical studies for the central nervous sys- tem (brain and spinal cord) include those described below.

Neuropsychologic assessment can characterize cog- nitive and behavioral alterations and therefore is use- ful in the clinical assessment and planning of patient management. The results of this assessment must be interpreted in the context of clinical and other test information. Many factors affect neuropsychological performance—age, education, socioeconomic status, and cultural background—and they must therefore be


considered for their influence on test results. Neuropsychological tests may be able to distinguish between abnormal and normal performance but can- not determine the cause of the problem. In other words, neuropsychological testing cannot demon- strate consistent diagnostic validity. Traumatic brain injury, for example, may have a profile similar to that of other forms of dementia.

Lumbar puncture (spinal tap) is a procedure by which cerebrospinal fluid is removed through a medium-sized needle, usually at the L3-4 interspace, in order to examine the presence of cells, proteins, glucose, or infection. This test may be performed when evaluating peripheral nerve disease. Other indi- cations are infections of the nervous system and, sometimes, multiple sclerosis.

An electroencephalogram (EEG) records the sponta- neous electrical activity generated by the cerebral cortex and is useful for recording the site and type of electrical discharge associated with seizure activity. Remember that a large percentage of cortical spikes are not recorded because they arise from deeper structures and there is significant attenuation by the cerebrospinal fluid and dura. Therefore, a seizure disorder is not necessarily accompanied by an abnor- mal EEG. Also, many diseases and metabolic abnor- malities produce nonspecific EEG abnormalities.
The EEG may be normal when the neurologic exam- ination is clearly abnormal since many areas of the brain are inaccessible to the recording electrodes and the EEG is time specific, ie, normal between dis- charges.

Evoked potentials are able to record components of response in the nervous system following multiple somatosensory, visual, and auditory stimuli. The integrity of these afferent pathways is evaluated. These studies may be used in the clinical evaluation of multi- ple sclerosis, optic neuritis, and acoustic neuroma.
Also, a variety of neurotoxins (eg, solvents, heavy met- als) may produce alterations in the evoked potentials.

Carotid duplex examination includes Doppler flow velocity of different areas in the carotid artery and, thus, estimates the severity of stenosis in the carotid artery. It is performed in the evaluation of cerebro- vascular disease.

Computed tomographic (CT) scan shows the anatomy of the brain, spinal cord, skull, and verte- bral column. X-ray beams are used to differentiate densities of bone-calcified tissue, gray matter, white matter, cerebrospinal fluid, and air. Intravenous

contrast demonstrates areas where the blood-brain barrier is disrupted. CT scans are not ideal for exami- nation of soft tissue but are better used to detect fresh hemorrhage or bone lesions.

CT myelogram uses a CT scan, after contrast material is injected into the dural sac, to show alterations in the anatomy between the dural sac and the structures that surround it. Since this is an invasive technique,
it may be used for diagnostic aid or preoperative planning.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) uses a powerful magnetic field to align the protons of the tissue that are excited by a radio frequency, subsequently form- ing an image from the different intensities of radio waves emitted from the different tissues. T1- weighted images show soft tissue anatomy, while T2-weighted images demonstrate edema and cere- brospinal fluid. Contrast agents enhance lesions
when there is disruption in the blood-brain barrier. A variety of MRI techniques enhance the ability to see different types of pathology.

Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) allows ves- sel visualization with images of different intensities that reflect velocity and flow patterns. Basically, visualization of vessels reflects physical differences between moving and stationary protons.

Positron emission tomography (PET) allows examina- tion of cerebral function by tomographic images.
Because of the complexity, cost, and limitation of iso- topes with short half-lives, most studies at present are limited to research protocols, although clinical studies are available to document, in some individuals, the presence of Parkinson’s disease in its early stages.

Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) assesses brain perfusion by use of tracers. Since there is a strong relationship between local metabolism and blood flow, SPECT provides indirect information about metabolism. Therefore, it may show abnormalities in dementia and neurodegenera- tive diseases.

The peripheral nervous system can be evaluated by means of the following tests.

Nerve conduction and needle electromyography (EMG) studies help to determine which nerves are involved and their anatomic location. Also evident will be whether sensory, motor, or both fibers are predominantly involved and whether axonal degener- ation, deymelination, or a combination of both is


present. Skillful differentiation of peripheral neu- ropathy and neuromuscular disorders may also be possible. Expert neuromuscular knowledge and understanding of pathologic manifestations of dis- ease processes are necessary for the appropriate application and performance of these tests, particu- larly the EMG. These tests are objective and require minimal cooperation from the individual being tested. They reflect pathology in the largest, fastest- conducting nerve fibers. The interpretation of these tests must be correlated with a detailed neurologic evaluation.

Quantitative sensory tests are portable tests, easily con- ducted in the clinician’s office, that provide a quantita- tive assessment of sensation. The integrity of large myelinated fibers is monitored with vibration thresh- old. Warm and cold temperature thresholds assess medium myelinated and unmyelinated fibers not reflected in nerve conduction studies. Since these are psychophysical tests, the cooperation of the individual being tested is required to process information from cutaneous receptors and provide the appropriate response. These tests can provide information about nerve fibers not examined by nerve conduction studies.

Autonomic function assessment is performed when cardiovascular, thermoregulatory, sphincter, and/or sexual dysfunction is believed to be caused by dysautonomia. For example, postural hypotension tests would include measuring heart rate and blood pressure response to the Valsalva maneuver and heart rate response to deep breathing, postural change, and stress. The integrity of both the central and efferent autonomic pathways is examined with these studies. Sweating abnormalities can be documented by warming the individual and then applying a powder that changes color when wet.


13.2 Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Central Nervous
	System Disorders
The central nervous system (CNS) consists of the brain and spinal cord. When injury or illness affects the CNS, several areas of function may be impaired. Therefore, the most severe category of impairment is based on the neurologic evaluation and relevant clini- cal investigations in four categories: (1) state of con- sciousness and level of awareness, whether

permanent or episodic; (2) mental status evaluation and integrative functioning; (3) use and understand- ing of language; and (4) influence of behavior and mood. The motor and sensory systems, gait, and coordination are evaluated once the four categories of cerebral impairment have been determined.

The most severe of these four categories should be used to determine a cerebral impairment rating.

Step 1. The initial step in assessing cerebral function is to determine whether disturbance is present in the level of consciousness or awareness. This may be a permanent alteration or an intermittent alteration in consciousness, awareness, or arousal. See Table 13-2 (Criteria for Rating Impairment of Consciousness and Awareness); Table 13-3 (Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Episodic Loss of Consciousness or Awareness); and Table 13-4 (Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Sleep and Arousal Disorders).
Step 2. Evaluate mental status and highest integra- tive functioning (see Table 13-6, Criteria for Rating Impairment Related to Mental Status).
Step 3. Identify any difficulty with understanding and use of language (see Table 13-7, Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Aphasia or Dysphasia).
Step 4. Evaluate any emotional or behavioral disturbances, such as depression, that can modify cerebral function (see Table 13-8, Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Emotional or Behavioral Disorders).
Step 5. Identify the most severe cerebral impairment listed above. Combine the most severe impairment from catagories 1 through 4 with any or multiple dis- tinct neurologic impairments listed in Table 13-1 using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).


13.3 Criteria for Rating Cerebral
	Impairments
13.3a Disturbances in Level of Consciousness and/or Awareness Individuals experiencing disturbances in conscious- ness may be suffering from a range of symptoms from episodes of altered awareness to being in a per- sistent vegetative state or an unresponsive coma.
These conditions are evaluated based on clinical findings on the neurologic examination and ancillary testing such as CT scan, MRI, SPECT, EEG, evoked potentials, and vestibular testing. The examination and tests will provide the extent of the underlying pathology and help examiners form a prognosis for patient management.


These neurologic disturbances may result in global loss of consciousness, responsiveness, or focal or lat- eral neurologic impairments. Table 13-2 lists criteria for determining permanent impairment ratings in individuals with these conditions, considering the severity of their condition and their ability to perform activities of daily living. For a class 1 rating, the indi- vidual is expected to perform activities of daily living (ADL) independently but may need assistance with activities that require fine motor dexterity (eg, button- ing). Class 2 impairment, in which individuals are moderately limited in ability to perform ADL, indi- cates the preservation of some independence but a need for assistance with transfers, bathing, and activi- ties that require fine motor skills. Impairment classes 3 and 4 are assigned to individuals who require assis- tance in performing all ADL; different levels of par- ticipation by the individual differentiate the level of care required in the two classes.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-1
0% to 14% Impairment Due to Parkinsonian Syndrome With Symptomatic Orthostatic Hypotension

Subject: 70-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; periodic episodes of sudden- onset drop attacks for the past 3 years. Paralysis agitans (Parkinson’s disease) for the past 10 years; under treatment with appropriate medications.
Current Symptoms: Postural hypotension, dizzi- ness, light-headedness with a resting tremor.
Physical Exam: BP: 140/90 mm Hg seated, 100/74 mm Hg standing, with minimal increase in pulse

rate. Classic features of Parkinson’s syndrome: flat facies, resting tremor and hesitant speech, cogwheeling, festinating gait and propulsion, and mild orofacial dyskinesia.
Clinical Studies: MRI: nonspecific mild widening of cortical sulci.
Diagnosis: Parkinsonian syndrome with sympto- matic orthostatic hypotension.
Impairment Rating: 14% impairment due to drop attacks; combine with appropriate rating from movement Section 13.5 to determine whole per- son impairment (see Combined Values Chart,
p. 604).
Comment: Despite many attempts to adjust medica- tions to control both sets of symptoms, the indi- vidual has some dependence on his caregivers to prevent serious falls, limiting his ability to per- form independently all activities of daily living.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-2
15% to 39% Impairment Due to Uremic Encephalopathy and Uremic Neuropathy

Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; 10-year history of progres- sive kidney failure, leading to thrice-weekly renal dialysis. Repeated episodes of lapse of concentra- tion and alteration of awareness, as well as uremic encephalopathy, for the past 3 years.
Current Symptoms: Periodic episodes of forgetful- ness, disorientation, apathy, wandering between dialysis treatments. Burning numb sensations in his feet.
Physical Exam: BP: 140/90 mm Hg; disheveled appearance, disoriented to time, person, and place; poor performance for three-word retention, spelling of world backward, serial 7s, and under- standing of proverbs. Diminished strength 4/5 dis- tally in both lower legs, with poor deep-tendon reflexes and decreased response to pin, cold, and vibration distally, and painful dysesthesias upon squeezing the soles of his feet.
Clinical Studies: EEG: poorly developed 8- to 13- Hz alpha activity with a preponderance of 4- to 7- Hz theta activity diffusely. CT scan: normal.
Blood studies: elevated blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, and calcium, and lowered phosphorus.
Diagnosis: Uremic encephalopathy with episodes of confusion and uremic neuropathy.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment due to dialy- sis dementia, confusion, and uremic neuropathy; combine with appropriate ratings due to kidney disease and peripheral neuropathy to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: The most limiting symptom of the renal failure is the individual’s periodic state of altered mentation and awareness, with a baseline demen- tia. This moderately interferes with his ability to perform activities of daily living in addition to the moderate limitations due to his peripheral neu- ropathy, which is mild, and his renal failure and periodic dialysis treatments.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-3
40% to 69% Impairment Due to Dementia and Nondominant-Side Hemiplegia

Subject: 65-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; third episode of sudden- onset left hemiparesis, hemianopia, hemisensory defects with poor subsequent recovery, which had followed previous episodes, persisting for the past 2 months.
Current Symptoms: Total nursing care for most activities of daily living. Attempts to feed himself but has no ability to transfer bed to chair. Poor control over bowel and bladder functions. He is not on a respirator and cardiac function is stable on medications.
Physical Exam: Disoriented; cannot follow direc- tions and has a poor fund of knowledge; has nam- ing difficulties. Flaccid left hemiparesis and hemisensory loss with hemianopia.
Clinical Studies: CT scan of head: no evidence of hemorrhage, with a lucency in the right central- parietal area. EEG: slow waves in the same area without seizure activity.
Diagnosis: Dementia and hemiplegia of the non- dominant side.
Impairment Rating: 49% impairment due to dementia; combine with appropriate ratings due to other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: This is a persistent state requiring care, with almost constant attention, for all activities of daily living. He can watch TV and request help when he needs it.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-4
70% to 90% Impairment Due to Persistent Vegetative State

Subject: 39-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; acute onset of coma 2 months ago following head trauma with subse- quent cardiorespiratory arrest and cardioversion. Fluid/nutrition by artificial means.
Current Symptoms: Deep unresponsiveness to ver- bal and painful stimuli.
Physical Exam: No response to environment or pur- poseful response to stimuli. No comprehension of language, with intermittent wakefulness in sleep- wake cycles. Survival with medical nursing care. Bladder and bowel incontinence. Pupils react to bright light. Extraocular movements (EOM) con- jugate but no doll’s-eye movements (eyes did not move from primary position while head was rotated like a painted doll’s eyes). Cold caloric response with nystagmus in either external ear canal. Regular cardiac rate; deep-tendon reflexes 1/5 and toes up-going.
Clinical Studies: CT scan: bilateral intracerebral hemorrhages with extension into ventricles. EEG: diffuse bilateral delta, slowing without paroxys- mal events.
Diagnosis: Persistent vegetative state due to cerebral contusion and intracranial hemorrhage.
Impairment Rating: 90% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Persistent vegetative state is defined as a “clinical condition of complete unawareness of the self and the environment accompanied by sleep-wake cycles with either complete or partial preservation of hypothalamic and brain stem auto- nomic functions.”1 The state is persistent 1 month after acute traumatic or nontraumatic brain injury.
---END EXAMPLE---
13.3b Episodic Neurologic Impairments The Guides rates episodic neurologic impairments that are persistent and permanent. Episodic condi- tions involve syncope or loss of awareness, convul- sive disorders, and arousal and sleep disorders.
Episodic indicates more than one occurrence. When these conditions originate from a problem in the nervous system, they should be evaluated according to the guidelines given in this chapter. For similar manifestations that originate in other body systems (eg, cardiovascular, respiratory) and secondarily affect the central nervous system, see the chapter(s) for the originating body system(s).

In assessing permanent impairment due to episodic conditions, first ensure that the individual’s condition has reached MMI and is unlikely to change signifi- cantly. Document the pattern of occurrence, estimate the effect of the condition on the individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living, and evaluate the effects of appropriate treatment. Record results from appropriate physiologic evaluations (eg, ECG, cardi- ologic evaluations, EEG) to document the disorder’s severity and provide information about prognosis.

Describe episodic disorders according to their onset, frequency, duration, and effect on performance of daily activities. Document and describe the results of seizure control. Daytime loss of consciousness with tonic or clonic seizures, nocturnal episodes with day- time residua, or brief lapses of awareness/communi- cation from minor seizures may interfere significantly with daily activities. Minor seizures with alterations of awareness or consciousness, tran- sient manifestations of unconventional behavior, or interruptions of daytime activity can result in an inability to perform activities of daily living.
Impairment ratings for major or minor seizures are calculated on the basis of how they affect the ability to perform activities of daily living.

The same criteria apply to impairments related to transient loss of awareness or consciousness (syn- cope, dizziness) after a period of cerebral ischemia that may be due to various mechanisms, including orthostasis, reflex actions, or cardiopulmonary disor- ders. Examiners may need to refer to other Guides chapters to estimate the magnitude of impairments related to cardiovascular disorders.

The criteria for evaluating episodic loss of con- sciousness or awareness are given in Table 13-3.


* This table is applicable to individuals receiving treatment.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-5
0% to 14% Impairment Due to Dizziness and Light- Headedness
Subject: 65-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; brief episodes of interrup- tion of speech, pale appearance, and light sweati- ness, with total recovery in minutes, for the past 2 years. These usually have occurred upon standing from a lying or seated position and are associated with a light-headed and/or dizzy sensation.
Current Symptoms: Continuation of the history without other sequelae or interruption of activities of daily living.
Physical Exam: BP: 130/80 mm Hg seated, 110/70 mm Hg upon standing, without increase in pulse rate.
Clinical Studies: No neurologic impairments.
Diagnosis: Dizziness and light-headedness.
Impairment Rating: 4% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: No additional impairments to combine.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-6
0% to 14% Impairment Due to Partial Epilepsy


Subject: 20-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; onset of generalized tonic- clonic convulsions in middle school at age 13 years, with subsequent evaluations of these being of focal origin with sensations in the right hand, shaking progressing to generalized tonic-clonic convulsions and a brief postictal period of diffi- culty in expressing self, as well as slight weakness of the right hand and headache with confusional state for about 2 to 3 hours. Episodes initially occurred about two to three times a week.
Current Symptoms: Treatment with anticonvul- sants, when taken regularly, has decreased the frequency to one to two minor, brief focal right- hand sensations and interruption in speech about every 2 to 3 months.
Physical Exam: Vital signs and physical/neurologic evaluations: normal.
Clinical Studies: EEG: rare spikes in the left tempo- ral area; otherwise normal. MRI: normal.
Diagnosis: Partial epilepsy, with mention of impair- ment of consciousness.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person due to seizures.
Comment: Attempts to control episodes completely have not been successful; as a result, individual’s license to operate a motor vehicle and work around moving machinery has been limited.
Employment has been limited in view of the diag- nosis and presumed risk of employment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-7
0% to 14% Impairment Due to Partial Epilepsy
Subject: 29-year-old woman.
History: Individual was involved in a motor vehicle accident with resulting head impact injury. She had a seizure 1 week later. Seizures are character- ized by onset in the left hand with a “funny” sen- sation, followed by rhythmic shaking that progresses to involve the entire arm. She has lip- smacking and talks inappropriately with postictal confusional state for about 5 to 10 minutes.
Current Symptoms: Treated with antiseizure mediction for 6 months with control of seizures, at which point medication was discontinued. Had a third seizure after 2 weeks off medication. Now back on an anticonvulsant with good control, but she periodically “feels funny.”
Physical Exam: No neurologic impairment on examination.
Clinical Studies: EEG, brain CT scan, and MRI: normal.
Diagnosis: Partial epilepsy with impairment of con- sciousness.
Impairment Rating: 14% impairment of the whole person due to seizures.
Comment: Posttraumatic epilepsy, fairly well con- trolled. The seizures require control as demon- strated by the recurrence following withdrawal of medication.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-8
15% to 29% Impairment Due to Partial Epilepsy
Subject: 40-year-old man.
History: Left-handed mechanic; at age 30 was involved in a motor vehicle accident with signifi- cant head trauma. Unconscious and hospitalized for 3 weeks; recovered, with rehabilitation, with no neurologic impairment on examination over the course of a year. Subsequently took training

and completed courses in motor mechanical repairs, but started having focal seizures with brief lapse of consciousness 5 years ago, occur- ring about twice a week until partially and inter- mittently controlled on medications.
Current Symptoms: Over the past year has taken his medication without fail with numerous attempts at modification by his neurologist.
Continues to have brief episodes of left arm/hand weakness, lasting about 3 minutes, about once a month, resulting in limited activities at work and inability to drive.
Physical Exam: Normal vital signs and general physical examination. No cognitive or communi- cation impairments; cranial nerve functions are normal. Mild weakness of dominant left hand, with poor dexterity in fine movements and strength 4/5. Deep-tendon reflexes are increased at the biceps area on the left; poor finger-nose fine dexterity.
Clinical Studies: EEG: periodic delta slowing in the right temporal-parietal area. MRI: old area of small infarction in the right posterior temporal- parietal region.
Diagnosis: Partial epilepsy without mention of impairment of consciousness.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person due to seizures; combine with appropriate rating due to neurologic impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Seizures developed after apparent cere- bral contusion as seen in the MRI and EEG, with persistent neurologic signs of impairment in his dominant hand. Seizures have not been controlled, and individual continues to have brief partial seizures in addition to hand impairment. The lat- ter should be combined in the whole person evalu- ations using the guidelines given in Chapter 16, The Upper Extremities.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-9
15% to 29% Impairment Due to Transient Alteration of Awareness and Orthostatic Hypotension

Subject: 75-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed African American; frequent episodes of loss of consciousness and falling or slumping with head dropping and pale appearance. These usually occur upon standing and never while lying down. Recovery in minutes without other problems. Previous history of cerebrovascu- lar accident (CVA) with mild residual left hemi- paresis. On antihypertensive medications.
Current Symptoms: Fairly frequent falls without injury and responsive immediately. Blood pressure very difficult to control with good compliance.
Physical Exam: BP: 160/90 mm Hg seated, 138/75 mm Hg on standing, with brief loss-of-awareness sensation. Mild left hemiplegia with sensory loss.
Clinical Studies: Tilt table testing: drop in BP 25/15 mm Hg without increased pulse.
Diagnosis: Transient alteration of awareness and orthostatic hypotension.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment due to tran- sient alteration of awareness and orthostatic hypotension; combine with an appropriate rating due to the hemiparesis with sensory loss to deter- mine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Hypertension in African Americans may be difficult to control. With advancing age, the medications may need to be adjusted to allow ade- quate cerebral perfusion.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-10
15% to 29% Impairment Due to Partial Epilepsy

Subject: 22-year-old man.
History: Suffered blunt trauma to the right side of the head during a robbery attempt in the store at which he works. Admitted in status epilepticus, but control was rapidly established with intra- venous phenytoin.
Current Symptoms: Maintained on phenytoin with- out further overt seizures, but he has frequent auras with derealization during which time he ceases activity. These episodes occur 0 to 8 times per day, last 5 to 10 minutes, and are followed by full recovery and resumption of activity.

Physical Exam: Normal neurologic evaluation.
Clinical Studies: MRI: left temporal lucency; EEG: left temporal rare spikes.
Diagnosis: Partial epilepsy without mention of impairment of consciousness.
Impairment Rating: 29% impairment of the whole person due to seizures.
Comment: Fairly frequent minor seizures that are not completely controlled and that interrupt individ- ual’s activities. Initial episode of status epilepticus.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-11
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Episodic Loss of Consciousness

Subject: 65-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; blunt head trauma with a skull fracture during a robbery 3 years ago.
Decompressive surgery was followed by mild left hemiplegia, which improved with rehabilitation. Episodes of syncope for the past 5 years.
Current Symptoms: Episodes of syncope, at times followed by brief increase in left hemiplegia.
Physical Examination: BP: 170/96 mm Hg seated, 130/70 mm Hg upon standing, without compensa- tory tachycardia. Moderate left hemiplegia, which improves over the next 30 minutes to baseline mild left hemiplegia.
Clinical Studies: MRI of head: contusion of the right parietal area; EEG: slowing in the same region.


Diagnosis: Syncope and collapse, transient cerebral ischemia, late effect intracranial injury, and cere- bral contusion.
Impairment Rating: 45% impairment due to above diagnosis; combine with an appropriate rating due to the hemiparesis to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: With the drop in blood pressure, there was a decrease in cerebral perfusion with brief decompensation of the previous neurologic impairment and subsequent return to baseline. This is not really a transient ischemic attack (TIA), but rather transient cerebral ischemia (TCI) secondary to decreased cerebral perfusion into a previously damaged area.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-12
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Partial Epilepsy, Impairment of Consciousness, and Episodes of Intractable Epilepsy

Subject: 45-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; policeman was shot in the left frontal area while restraining a person with a gun. Hospitalized for surgery; recovered without neurologic paresis but continues to have seizures.
Current Symptoms: Frequent minor complex seizures of the right hand and leg, which progress periodically to almost continuous seizures with loss of consciousness.
Physical Exam: Mild right hand loss of dexterity and fine movement; slight dragging of right leg.
Clinical Studies: MRI: area of contusion left fron- totemporal; EEG: slowing in the same area with frequent polyspike waves.
Diagnosis: Partial epilepsy, with mention of impair- ment of consciousness and with episodes of intractable epilepsy.
Impairment Rating: 45% impairment due to epilepsy and impairment of consciousness; com- bine with appropriate ratings for other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impair- ment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: The bullet entered the individual’s skull; there was good subsequent recovery following operation. The resultant seizures, unfortunately, are difficult to control with episodes of status epilepticus, in spite of good compliance.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-13
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Generalized Convulsive Epilepsy

Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Man was rescued, in an unconscious state, from a burning building; had experienced significant smoke inhalation. Recovered con-
sciousness; diagnosis of hypoxic encephalopathy. Hospitalized for a month with gradual recovery of mental function.
Current Symptoms: Has two to six generalized tonic-clonic seizures per week, usually with a
1- to 2-hour postictal state, in spite of good com- pliance with medications.
Physical Exam: No focal neurologic impairment; however, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) was 23/30.
Clinical Studies: EEG: bitemporal sharp waves with hyperventilation.
Diagnosis: Generalized convulsive epilepsy without mention of intractable epilepsy.
Impairment Rating: 49% impairment due to gener- alized convulsive epilepsy; combine with any mental and behavioral impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: The event of being trapped in a burning building caused hypoxic encephalopathy with no other focal neurologic impairments except seizures and additional mental status changes that need to be combined.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-14
50% to 70% Impairment Due to Uncontrolled Epilepsy

Subject: 50-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; sudden onset of severe headache, right hemiparesis, and brief loss of con- sciousness 3 months ago. Subsequent improve- ment to stable state and rehabilitation.
Current Symptoms: Unable to use dominant hand for activities of daily living or to communicate needs or concerns. Frequent, uncontrolled, spon- taneous right-sided clonic seizures with loss of consciousness and awareness and with postictal confusional state for about 5 to 10 minutes.
Physical Exam: Right hemiparesis, hemianopia, inability to express herself, and poor comprehen- sion of spoken or written words.
Clinical Studies: CT scan of head: large intracere- bral hematoma in the central area on the left side, with effacement on the ventricles; EEG: delta slowing in the same area.
Diagnosis: Late effect of cerebrovascular disease, secondary to traumatic intracerebral hematoma, with dysphasia, right hemiparesis, and partial epilepsy, and with mention of impairment of con- sciousness and episodes of status epilepticus.
Impairment Rating: 65% impairment due to seizures; combine with appropriate rating for other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Rating for uncontrolled seizures should be combined with rating for whole person based on other neurologic impairments.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-15
50% to 70% Impairment Due to Shy-Drager Syndrome With Orthostatic Hypotension

Subject: 45-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; 5-year history of very diffi- cult to control parkinsonism with various medica- tions and severe orthostatic hypotension, postprandial hypotension, constipation, and poor bladder control.
Current Symptoms: Frequent episodes of fainting and falling that require attendance, bed and wheelchair living, and assistance with all activi- ties of daily living and feeding.
Physical Exam: BP: 110/80 mm Hg lying down, 70/40 mm Hg seated. Resting tremor with sweaty face, decrease in facial expression, rigidity of all four extremities, and unintelligible speech.
Clinical Studies: Tilt table test: positive for ortho- static hypotension.
Diagnosis: Multiple-system atrophy (Shy-Drager syndrome) with orthostatic hypotension.
Impairment Rating: 70% impairment due to Shy- Drager syndrome with orthostatic hypotension; combine with appropriate rating for parkinsonism to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: A very serious condition, which is parkinsonlike but with more profound autonomic failure. It is very unresponsive to therapeutic attempts.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-16
50% to 70% Impairment Due to Partial Epilepsy With Impairment of Consciousness

Subject: 44-year-old man.
History: Drove a delivery truck; lost control of the vehicle on a wet road and struck a tree. Hit his head on the windshield and developed a left epidural hematoma requiring urgent evacuation.
Current Symptoms: More than 6 months following the accident, has frequent partial complex seizures characterized by decreased responsiveness, lip smacking, and rightward eye deviation. These occur up to five times per day despite the use of three anticonvulsant agents. May undergo second- ary generalization with tonic-clonic seizures occurring once or twice per week.


Physical Exam: Mild right hemiparesis with a left craniotomy scar, well healed.
Clinical Studies: CT scan: left skull defect and underlying small lucency. EEG: rare spike/slow waves left temporal.
Diagnosis: Partial epilepsy with impairment of con- sciousness.
Impairment Rating: 70% impairment due to partial epilepsy with impairment of consciousness; com- bine with appropriate rating for hemiparesis to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: The posttraumatic epidural hematoma was evacuated successfully; however, there was additional underlying brain contusion from the head trauma, which accounts for the mild hemi- paresis.
---END EXAMPLE---

13.3c Arousal and Sleep Disorders
Arousal and sleep disorders include disorders related to initiating and maintaining sleep or inability to sleep; excessive somnolence, including sleep-induced respiratory impairment; and sleep-wake schedules.

Impairment categories that may arise from sleep dis- orders relate to (1) the nervous system, with reduced daytime attention, concentration, and other cognitive abilities; (2) mental and behavioral factors, including depression, irritability, interpersonal difficulties, and

social problems; (3) the cardiovascular system, with systemic and pulmonary hypertension, cardiac enlargement, congestive heart failure, or arrhyth- mias; and (4) the hematopoietic system. The Respiratory System (Chapter 5) also discusses impairment as it relates to obstructive sleep apnea.

Neurologic disorders associated with increased day- time sleepiness include central sleep apnea syn- drome, narcolepsy, idiopathic hypersomnia, periodic limb movement disorder, restless leg syndrome, depression, brain tumors, posttraumatic hypersomno- lence, multiple sclerosis, encephalitis and posten- cephalopathy, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, multiple system atrophy, and neuromuscular disorders with sleep apnea. It is expected that the diagnosis of excessive daytime sleepiness has been supported by formal studies in a sleep laboratory.

The clinician can evaluate sleepiness with the Epworth Sleepiness Scale,2 which assesses the likeli- hood of dozing (never = 0 to high chance = 3) in dif- ferent situations: sitting and reading, watching television, sitting in a public place, riding as a pas- senger for an hour, taking an afternoon nap, sitting and talking to someone, sitting after a nonalcohol lunch, and stopped in traffic in a car. A score of 10/24 is equal to excessive sleepiness, or class 2 impairment. This scale correlates with the multiple sleep latency test (MSLT), which supports pathologic sleep in narcolepsy and idiopathic hypersomnia. See Table 13-4 for impairment due to sleep and arousal disorders.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-17
1% to 9% Impairment Due to Obstructive Sleep Apnea

Subject: 47-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; moderately obese; suffered a serious crush injury to the right foot. While the foot was healing, the man was unable to exercise and gained 20.25 kg (45 lb), whereupon he devel- oped daytime somnolence. Despite his best efforts, he remains unable to lose the excess weight.
Current Symptoms: Able to complete most neces- sary work, but works less efficiently and cannot take on any new special projects.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Cranial CT scan: normal; poly- somnogram: findings consistent with obstructive sleep apnea.
Diagnosis: Obstructive sleep apnea.
Impairment Rating: 9% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Except for daytime somnolence, the indi- vidual has a normal neurologic exam.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-18
10% to 29% Impairment Due to Ideopathic Hypersomnolence

Subject: 31-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; several lapses of awareness while driving; on one occasion she awakened with her car off the road, having no idea what had happened or how she had arrived there. No history of seizures.

Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: EEG and brain MRI: normal; polysomnogram: marked hypersomnolence.
Diagnosis: Idiopathic hypersomnolence.
Impairment Rating: 19% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The individual responds partially to stim- ulants but should not drive a vehicle, nor can she handle dangerous materials. Reduced daytime alertness interferes with ability to perform some daytime activities.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-19
30% to 69% Impairment Due to Narcolepsy


Subject: 37-year-old woman.
History: Left-handed; suffered two work demotions because of declining work performance and poor memory. Complains of morning headache and excessive daytime somnolence; experiences mul- tiple daily episodes in which the urge to nap is irresistible. If this occurs while driving, she has to pull off the road. The naps last 10 or 15 minutes, after which she feels refreshed.
Physical Exam: Normal.
Clinical Studies: Brain MRI: normal; polysomno- gram and MSLT: findings consistent with nar- colepsy.
Diagnosis: Narcolepsy.
Impairment Rating: 39% impairment of the whole person
Comment: Reduced daytime alertness with sleep episodes uncontrolled.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-20
70% to 90% Impairment Due to Brainstem Infarct

Subject: 62-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; could not be awakened in bed.
Current Symptoms: Severe somnolence with occa- sional brief periods of arousal.
Physical Exam: Flaccid bilateral paraparesis, loss of lateral gaze bilaterally, and loss of facial move- ment bilaterally.
Clinical Studies: MRI of the brain: occlusion of the basilar artery with extensive midbrain infarction.
Diagnosis: Brainstem infarct secondary to a basilar artery occlusion.
Impairment Rating: 90% impairment due to brain- stem infarct and basilar artery occlusion; combine with appropriate ratings due to other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impair- ment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: This individual could also have been rated using Table 13-2, Criteria for Rating Impairment of Consciousness and Awareness, assigning class 4 for 90% impairment due to semicoma. Using Table 13-4, the individual has severe reduction of daytime alertness and is unable to care for himself.
---END EXAMPLE---

13.3d Mental Status, Cognition, and Highest Integrative Function
Mental status and integrative function deficits include the general effects of organic brain syndrome; dementia; and some specific, focal, and neurologic deficiencies. Mental status tests are used to screen and follow individuals, frequently with repeated test- ing. They usually cover measures of orientation, attention, immediate recall, calculations, abstraction, construction, information, and recall. Frequently used mental status tests that cover these domains include the 6-item, short Blessed Test,3 the Neurobehavioral Cognitive Status Examination (NCSE),4 and the
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE).5 These screening tests can identify severely impaired individ- uals and are used to determine whether further evalu- ation with neuropsychological testing is needed.

Neuropsychological test battery covers many func- tional domains—attention, language, memory, visuo- spatial skills, executive function, intelligence, motor speed, and educational achievement—using tests with established validity and reliability. Individuals with severe cognitive impairments that have been identified on mental status tests will usually not ben- efit from neuropsychological evaluation. It is the per- son with subtle cognitive changes who benefits from neuropsychological testing. Neurologic disorders that have different behavioral ramifications amenable to neuropsychological evaluation include traumatic brain injury, dementia, Parkinson’s disease, human immunodeficiency virus, encephalopathy, multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, neurotoxic exposure, chronic pain, and personality assessment in individuals with neurologic disease.

The criteria for evaluating mental status and cognitive impairment are based on the amount of interference with the ability to perform activities of daily living.
This information can be obtained from someone who has close and continual contact with the individual and can be documented using any one of numerous ADL indices that determine changes in activities of daily living (eg, Barthel ADL Index6 and Blessed Dementia Scale7). A tool that combines both cognitive skills and function is the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR),8-10 which covers memory, orientation, judg- ment and problem solving, home and hobbies, com- munity affairs, and personal care. This validated clinical assessment tool is reproduced in Table 13-5 to serve as an example of how to evaluate cognitive change in light of ADL impairment. One of the stan- dardized mental status tests—the short Blessed, NCSE, or MMSE—can be used in conjunction with the CDR to rate the impairment. To use the CDR, score the individual’s cognitive function for each cate- gory (M, O, JPS CA, HH, and PC) independently.
The maximum CDR score is 3. Memory is considered the primary category; the other categories are second- ary. If at least three secondary categories are given the same numeric score as memory, then CDR = M. If three or more secondary categories are given a score greater or less than the memory score, CDR = the score of the majority of secondary categories unless three secondary categories are scored on one side of M and two secondary categories are scored on the other side of M. In this case, CDR = M. Adapted from 8

Corresponding impairment ratings for CDR scores are listed in Table 13-6. A CDR score of 0.5 = class 1 impairment, CDR score of 1 = class 2, CDR score of 2 = class 3, and CDR score of 3 = class 4.


Source: Morris JC. The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR): current version and scoring rules [see comment]. Neurology. 1993;43(11):2412-2414. Reprinted with permission.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-21
15% to 29% Impairment Due to Alzheimer’s Disease
Subject: 75-year-old man.
History: Left-handed; 2 to 3 years’ history of loss of interest in current events, inability to find his home or location, wandering out of the house, poor short-term memory, inability to balance checkbook, and inability to comprehend TV pro- grams or newspapers.

Current Symptoms: No focal or lateral neurologic symptoms with loss of recent memory; failure to follow through on instructions; inability to calcu- late.
Physical Exam: Disoriented to time, person, and place; can’t recall three unrelated words or spell world backward, but can identify objects, copy pentagons, and write a sentence. No focal or lat- eral neurologic impairments. Ambulatory; needs assistance feeding self and dressing. Speech is articulate. Cooperative and noncombative.
Clinical Studies: CT scan and MRI: normal except for mild widening of cortical sulci. EEG: poorly developed to absent rhythmic alpha activity with- out slowing or paroxysm.


Diagnosis: Alzheimer’s disease.
Impairment Rating: 29% impairment of the whole person due to mental impairment.
Comment: Dementia is progressing and dependence is becoming more of a problem.
This case merits a CDR of 1.0.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-22
30% to 49% Impairment Due to Traumatic Brain Injury

Subject: 25-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; 1 year ago was involved in a head-on collision of the car he was driving with another automobile, which had crossed the high- way median. Did not have his seat belt on, and did

not recall hitting his head on the steering wheel and windshield. Brought to the hospital uncon- scious; had sustained a fracture of the left arm. Over the next 4 weeks, gradually improved with rehabilitation; had no recall of the accident or immediate preceding events.
Current Symptoms: Moderate inability to follow commands and find his room. Disoriented to time, person, and place; wanders alone and gets lost in familiar surroundings. Loss of interest in home activities and current events. Sleep-wake cycle has been interrupted. Decreased ability to initiate responses, agitation, learning difficulties, impul- sivity, and social disinhibition.
Physical Exam: No focal or lateral paralysis, but attention and gait are slow. The latter is not grossly ataxic, and Romberg sign is negative. Cranial nerve functions are intact. Mental status examination reveals 18/30 with poor orientation; difficulty with recall of three unrelated words and spelling world backward. No motor or sensory difficulties, and cerebellar testing is adequate.
Diagnosis: Traumatic brain injury.


Impairment Rating: 40% impairment due to menta- tion impairment; combine with ratings due to other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: This case merits a CDR of 2.0. The con- cept of traumatic brain injury is being developed into mild, moderate, and severe categories result- ing from “significant impairment of an individ- ual’s physical, cognitive, and psychosocial functions.” The “more problematic consequences involve the individual’s cognition, emotional functioning, and behavior.”11 If there are other impairments, the combined rating of those impair- ments should be added.
---END EXAMPLE---

13.3e Communication Impairments: Dysphasia and Aphasia
Communication involves comprehension, under- standing, language, and effective interaction between and among individuals. Aphasia is a condition in which language function is defective or absent. It includes a lack of comprehension with deficits in vision, hearing, and language (both spoken and writ- ten), and also the inability to implement discernible and appropriate language symbols by voice, action, writing, or pantomime. Dysphasia is a language impairment that is less severe than aphasia (which literally means “no speech”) but still is associated with a lesion in the dominant parietal lobe. It pres- ents as a communication problem due to receptive or expressive dysphasia or a combination of the two.
Inability to have a meaningful conversation because no nouns are used is an example of dysphasia. Other common errors include errors of grammatical struc- ture, word-finding difficulties, and word substitution. Dysphasia and aphasia are different from dysarthria, which is imperfect articulation of speech due to dis- ordered muscle control. Dysphonia is an impairment of sound production that causes difficulty speaking and understanding. Speech and communication impairments due to nonneurologic primary problems are discussed in Chapter 11, Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures.

Dysphasia is the most common diagnosis, since most individuals usually retain some ability to communi- cate. An inability to understand language has a poorer prognosis than an inability to express lan- guage. Speech therapy is of little value in the absence of comprehension; therefore, compensatory techniques may not be learned when a receptive aphasia or dysphasia exists. Tests for dysphasia should be conducted after it is established how con- fused or disoriented the individual is and which side of the brain is dominant for speech. Cognition should also be evaluated after dysphasia mechanisms have been excluded.

Aphasia and dysphasia test batteries are frequently devised by the clinician and cover the following sim- ple tasks: (1) listening to spontaneous speech or responses to simple questions; (2) pointing com- mands and questions that can be answered “yes” or “no” to test comprehension; (3) repeating words and phrases; (4) naming objects that have high- and low- frequency use; (5) reading comprehension and read- ing aloud (reading is related to educational achievement, which must be known before interpret- ing reading comprehension and reading aloud results); and (6) writing and spelling.12 If comprehen- sion is relatively intact, the aphasia screening battery may be adequate to place an individual in class 1 or
2. However, individuals with dysphasia may score poorly on aphasia and dysphasia test batteries
while they demonstrate communicative competency for activities of daily living. This communicative competency may be measured by means of the Communicative Abilities in Daily Living (CADL),13 in which nonverbal communication is assessed.
Table 13-7 describes the criteria for rating impair- ment due to aphasia or dysphasia.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-23
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Dysphasia

Subject: 45-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; head trauma while doing laundry in cellar; brief episode of loss of aware- ness.
Current Symptoms: Periodic difficulty expressing herself in conversations.
Physical Exam: Unable to name objects on sight, but can point to object when seen on a printed card. Able to read and comprehend language. Mild periodic dysnomia in trying to name objects.
Diagnosis: Dysphasia, mild intermittent Broca’s dysphasia, and other speech disturbances as late effect of accident—striking against object acci- dentally.
Impairment Rating: 7% impairment of the whole person due to speech impairment.
Comment: Only neurologic impairment is a periodic inability to speak correctly. This case is rated for the speech impairment since this is the most severe cerebral criteria impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-24
0% to 9% Impairment Due to Expressive Dysphasia

Subject: 47-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; traveling by train when a sudden stop occurred. Individual was thrown for- ward, striking her head on a metal railing and suf- fering 10 minutes of loss of consciousness, with subsequent loss of ability to find the correct words to express herself.

Current Symptoms: Persistent difficulty finding correct words with loss of vocabulary.
Physical Exam: Inability to name objects on sight, but can point to the object when shown its name on a card. Understands verbal commands and can copy words. Orientation is difficult because of inability to express the date. No hemiparesis or sensory impairment.
Clinical Studies: Neuropsychological testing was limited due to individual’s inability to correctly express herself.
Diagnosis: Expressive dysphasia.
Impairment Rating: 9% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: This is an example of traumatic brain injury with minimal residual impairment that involves production of language and is limiting daily activities. The rating was done at a time when this impairment was deemed to be stable (MMI), namely, 6 months following the injury.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-25
10% to 24% Impairment Due to Receptive Dysphasia


Subject: 45-year-old man.
History: Left-handed; individual’s car was struck from the right frontal side while crossing an inter- section. He wore no seat belt, and no air bag was present. His head hit the windshield and mirror; no loss of consciousness, but a bruise was noted over the left parietal area.


Current Symptoms: This individual apparently does not comprehend simple commands and therefore has difficulty both in his work area and at home.
Physical Exam: Able to name objects from sight but has difficulty understanding verbal and written commands.
Clinical Studies: MRI of the brain with enhance- ment: mild contusion of the left temporal parietal area; EEG: mild slowing in the same area.
Diagnosis: Receptive dysphasia as a late effect of a motor vehicle accident.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment due to dys- phasia; combine with appropriate ratings due to other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Trauma to the left temporal parietal area in a left-handed individual without clear domi- nance of side for development of speech has resulted in receptive dysphasia in speech and mild impairment in understanding.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-26
25% to 39% Impairment Due to Hemiplegia, Homonymous Hemianopia, and Conduction Aphasia
Subject: 60-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; progressive loss of function of the right arm, face, and leg over 2 days; fluent speech but poor understanding. Slow recovery to stable state 2 months later.
Current Symptoms: Walks with a stiff right leg and needs to use a cane. Right arm is flexed, and indi- vidual has difficulty expressing herself, substitut- ing inappropriate words.
Physical Exam: Paraphrases words and reads poorly out loud. Also has difficulty writing from dicta- tion, with substituted words and misspellings.
Examination demonstrated a spastic right hemi- plegia, hemianopia, and hemisensory impairment.

Clinical Studies: CT scan and MRI/MRA: large infarction in the area of the angular branch of the left middle cerebral artery.
Diagnosis: Late effect of CVA: hemiplegia affecting dominant side, aphasia, homonymous hemi- anopia, and conduction aphasia.
Impairment Rating: 30% impairment due to dyspha- sia; combine with appropriate ratings due to other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Major stroke in the dominant hemisphere due to occlusion of a branch of the middle cere- bral artery by presumed thrombus. MMI has been achieved, and current state is stable.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-27
40% to 60% Impairment Due to Hypoxic Encephalopathy With Focal Seizures

Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: Left-handed; fireman was trapped in a burning private home; he was brought out uncon- scious by another fireman and was revived on- site. He was taken to the hospital constant care unit, where he remained for 6 weeks with slow improvement to a stable state.
Current Symptoms: Needs complete ADL care, including bladder and bowel functions. In a chair and/or bed situation for all activities. Will occa- sionally respond but is completely unable to com- municate or comprehend language symbols. Has periodic focal complex parietal seizures that are poorly controlled with medications.
Physical Exam: Complete inability to speak with comprehension; no paresis or seizures.
Clinical Studies: EEG: diffuse slow activity with discharges in the left temporal area. MRI and CT scan: normal.
Diagnosis: Hypoxic encephalopathy with focal seizures.


Impairment Rating: 60% impairment due to apha- sia; combine with appropriate ratings due to other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: This is a case of very serious hypoxic encephalopathy due to inhalation of fumes and gases in a burning building, resulting in severe generalized impairment of central nervous system control of many functions including swallowing, nutrition, and bladder and bowel function.
---END EXAMPLE---

13.3f Emotional or Behavioral Impairments
Emotional, mood, and behavioral disturbances illus- trate the relationship between neurology and psychi- atry. Emotional disturbances originating in verifiable neurologic impairments (eg, stroke, head injury) are assessed using the criteria in this chapter. Psychiatric features may also exist with primary neurologic dis- orders. Psychiatric features can range from irritabil- ity to outbursts of rage or panic and from aggression to withdrawal. Neurologic impairments producing psychiatric conditions are assessed using the neuro- logic examination, with an expanded neuropsychi- atric history and the necessary ancillary tests.
Psychiatric impairments may include depression, manic states, emotional fluctuations, socially unac- ceptable behavior, involuntary laughing or crying, impulsivity, general disinhibition with obsessive and scatological behaviors, and other kinds of CNS responses.

Psychiatric manifestations and impairments that do not have documented neurologic impairments are evaluated using the criteria in the chapter on mental and behavioral impairments (See Table 13-8 and Chapter 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders).
---START EXAMPLE---
Examples of neurologic conditions associated with changes in emotion and affect include (1) right hemi- sphere infarct and inappropriate jocularity; (2) left hemisphere infarct and deep dejection and dysphasia;
(3) left-sided temporolimbic seizure foci and ideational disorders; and (4) right-sided temporolim- bic seizure foci and mood disturbances. With the more diffuse pathology underlying the dementias, “no cognitive” behavioral symptoms (apathy, delusions, dysphoria, agitation/aggression, euphoria, hallucina- tions, irritability/lability, and aberrant motor behav- ior) may be assessed with the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI).14 This tool was evaluated for content and concurrent validity, has good test-retest reliability, and has good internal consistency among the items of the NPI. The NPI assesses behaviors’ frequency and severity to assist in determining daily function.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-28
15% to 29% Impairment Due to Traumatic Encephalopathy

Subject: 60-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; former competitive boxer; for the past 10 years has been a sparring partner for professional boxers. In the past, he frequently has been rendered unconscious in training ses- sions and boxing events.
Current Symptoms: Episodes of mild confusion and occasional unsteadiness of gait, with diffi- culty in speech and articulation; has a mild head tremor.
Physical Exam: No paresis or sensory defect, but has difficulty with neuropsychological testing, short-term memory, calculation, serial 7s or 3s subtraction. Difficulty with inappropriate jocular- ity and interpersonal relationships.
Clinical Studies: CT scan and MRI: very mild widening of the cerebral sulci. EEG: poor back- ground alpha activity but no definite focal or generalized slowing.
Diagnosis: Traumatic encephalopathy.
Impairment Rating: 17% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The problem in this case is the frequency of head trauma over the course of years, including occasional knockouts.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-29
30% to 69% Impairment Due to Low-Grade Glioma

Subject: 35-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; progressive irritability and periodic lethargy. Individual has had difficulty shopping for groceries, cooking, cleaning, and helping her children with their homework.

Current Symptoms: A new headache and very slight difficulty in handwriting. She has become labile, irritable, apathetic, and intermittently agi- tated.
Physical Exam: Diminished fine dexterity of the right hand with loss of 2-point discrimination in that hand and inability to properly identify coins. Unable to find right hand in space with the left hand. No definite paresis or other sensory defects.
Clinical Studies: MRI of the brain with contrast: mildly enhancing 2-cm area in the left parietal region with moderate ventricular compression. EEG: intermittent moderate-amplitude delta activ- ity in the left parietal region.
Diagnosis: Probable low-grade glioma, left parietal region.
Impairment Rating: 45% impairment due to the glioma; combine with appropriate ratings due to other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart p. 604).
Comment: The major problem is the limitation of daily activities, social, interpersonal, and family functioning, with mild focalizing sensory neuro- logic impairments confirmed by clinical studies.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-30
70% to 90% Impairment Due to Huntington’s Chorea


Subject: 40-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; progressive difficulty with recent memory, keeping track of financial obliga- tions, and maintaining checkbook over the past 2 years. Similar history in his father and, possibly, paternal grandfather.
Current Symptoms: Individual has recently devel- oped a periodic, somewhat explosive, hand-arm movement with facial grimacing. He has begun to wander away from the house and recently was restricted in driving his automobile because he got lost in familiar areas.


Physical Exam: No cranial nerve signs or motor- sensory impairments except for chorea of both extremities and face and a dancing, arrhythmic gait. Mini-Mental State Exam was 15/30.
Clinical Studies: MRI: decrease of the area of the caudate. EEG: relatively poor background activity without focal or lateral abnormalities.
Diagnosis: Huntington’s chorea.
Impairment Rating: 70% impairment due to Huntington’s chorea; combine with appropriate ratings due to other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: The major impairments here include all ADL, in addition to movement disorder and gait impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

The remainder of this chapter covers the impair- ments listed in Table 13-1. The following impair- ments are combined with the most severe category of cerebral impairment described previously. If no cere- bral impairment exists, the following impairments can stand alone or be combined with each other using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).


13.4 Criteria for Rating Impairments of the
	Cranial Nerves
13.4a Cranial Nerve I—the Olfactory Nerve
The olfactory nerve is responsible for the sense of smell and odor recognition. It is located on the floor of the skull’s frontal fossa and is only occasionally impaired from trauma or other mechanism. Lack of sense of smell may reduce taste perception, which is mediated by cranial nerves VII and IX. Partial or complete right or left dysosmia or anosmia, or a per- version of the sense of smell, parosmia, may occur. Combine the estimate for anosmia or parosmia (given only if the anosmia interferes significantly with daily activities) with any other permanent impairment to determine the whole person impairment. The Smell Identification TestTM15 is a quantitative test for smell with an extensive normative database. The maximum impairment from anosmia is 3%.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-31
3% Impairment Due to Olfactory Tract Damage


Subject: 24-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; individual had a car accident without a seat belt 4 months ago and sustained a severe whiplash and subsequently struck his forehead on the windshield, with brief loss of consciousness.
Current Symptoms: Intermittent dizziness and headaches, but individual is more bothered by loss of smell and diminished appetite secondary to lack of taste.
Physical Exam: Normal except for 10/40 on the University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test, which is compatible with anosmia.
Clinical Studies: CT scan, MRI, and EEG: normal.
Diagnosis: Olfactory tract damage.
Impairment Rating: 3% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: It is important to remember not to use an irritant when testing smell, since this will stimu- late trigeminal nerve endings and not reflect olfactory function. Appropriate bedside odorants include coffee, flowers, and some foods.
---END EXAMPLE---

13.4b Cranial Nerve II—the Optic Nerve The optic nerves carry visual information from the eyes to the visual cortex of the brain. Loss of visual input can have a profound influence on the ability to perform ADL. Impairment ratings for vision loss are discussed in general in this chapter and in more detail in Chapter 12 (The Visual System).

The optic nerve is one neural component of the visual system. The other components include the retina; the optic chiasm, which is unique in that only half of the nerve fibers cross to the contralateral side; the optic tracts; optic radiation; and visual cortex.
This section discusses vision loss due to prechiasmal lesions, such as optic nerve dysfunction (eg, optic neuritis), as well as postchiasmal vision loss due to cortical lesions (eg, hemianopia).

General Principles of Vision Assessment (see Chapter 12 for more detail)
Tables 13-9 and 13-10 in this section and the tables in Chapter 12 have been significantly revised from previous editions to reflect the effect of vision changes on the ability to perform ADL as listed in


Table 1-2. When assessing vision, the ratings for visual acuity loss and visual field loss are combined to a global visual impairment rating as summarized in Table 12-1. Since vision in one eye still enables one to perform most ADL, binocular vision is weighted more heavily than monocular vision. Thus, vision loss in one eye will receive a much lower impairment rating than vision loss in both eyes.
As discussed in detail in Chapter 12, evaluation of near-vision is optional and visual acuity loss to 20/200 receives a 50% impairment rating (see Tables 12-2,
12-3, and 12-4). Visual field loss is sampled in 10 meridians, two in each superior quadrant, three in each inferior quadrant (Figure 12-1). Thus, a homony- mous upper quadrantanopia will receive an impair- ment rating of about 20%; an inferior quadrantanopia will be rated at about 30%; a homonymous hemi- anopia, at about 50% (Tables 12-5, 12-6, and 12-7).

The whole person impairment rating results from the visual acuity impairment rating and the visual field impairment rating are detailed in Section 12-4. If acuity or visual fields are normal, the whole person

impairment rating equals the abnormal visual impair- ment rating.
Vision Assessment Using Chapter 13
Due to the neurologic basis of vision, some condi- tions affecting vision may be evaluated using the guidelines in this chapter. Simple cases of visual acu- ity loss without peripheral field loss, such as those caused by optic neuritis, can be evaluated using Table 13-9. More complex conditions should be evaluated according to the methodology detailed in Chapter 12.

Simple cases of visual field loss, with normal acuity, may be evaluated using Table 13-10. Since postchi- asmal lesions will result in vision loss in the con- tralateral hemifield of both eyes (eg, homonymous hemianopia or quadrantanopia), visual field tests can be an important diagnostic tool in localizing a lesion. For diagnostic purposes, a tangent screen test involv- ing the central 30° is often sufficient. For complex vision loss patterns, especially those with some remaining peripheral vision and noncongruous pat- terns as may occur in chiasmal lesions, a full evalua- tion as detailed in Chapter 12 is required.


Note: This table is based on the best corrected acuity and assumes that the visual fields are normal. See Chapter 12 for more complex cases of visual acuity loss. Note that the ability to perform ADL depends largely on the acuity of the better eye.


Note: This table assumes that the visual acuity is still normal (as in hemianopia with macular sparing). See Chapter 12 for more complex cases, including noncongruous visual field loss and visual field loss combined with visual acuity loss. Note that the ability to perform ADL depends on the extent of the binocular field.


Lesions of the visual cortex may cause a homony- mous visual field defect. Parietal lesions may cause visual neglect. Where possible, both these conditions should be evaluated for their effect on ADL skills.
Because of brain plasticity, gradual improvement over a considerable period of time is possible.
Ensure that the impairment is permanent, ie, unlikely to change significantly over the next year. If the vision loss is accompanied by other neurologic dys- function, use the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to combine the impairment rating from both conditions.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-32
10% Visual Acuity Impairment Due to Unilateral Optic Neuritis

Subject: 27-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; enjoyed good health with accurate vision until 6 months ago, when she developed a painless progressive vision loss in the left eye. During the subsequent 6 months, visual clarity returned slightly.

Current Symptoms: Vision is blurred when she tries to read the newspaper with the affected eye; she has not been able to see television images clearly with this eye. She can perform all ADL functions with the unaffected eye.
Physical Exam: Near and far visual acuity of the left eye is 20/200; right eye, 20/20; binocular, 20/20. The eyes are externally normal; ophthalmoscopy reveals moderate pallor of the left optic disk. The pupil of the left eye is slightly dilated and poorly reactive to a direct light stimulus. No reaction in the right eye to left eye stimulation. When the right eye is stimulated with bright light, there is prompt constriction of the pupil of the left eye.
No other cranial nerve signs.
Clinical Studies: Visual evoked potentials: prolon- gation of the P100 in the left eye.
Diagnosis: Optic neuritis, left eye.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person based on Table 13-9 and a left eye acuity of 20/200.


Comment: Although this case represents a 50% visual acuity loss in the left eye, the impairment rating is much lower, since the ability to perform ADL depends largely on the better eye. If the right eye had the same loss, the impairment rating would be much worse.
---END EXAMPLE---

13.4c Cranial Nerves III, IV, and VI— the Oculomotor, Trochlear, and Abducens Nerves
The oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerves innervate the muscles that move the eyeballs. The oculomotor nerve also controls pupil size and reac- tion to light. Malfunction of the oculomotor system results in strabismus, ie, misalignment of the visual axes. There are two main types of malfunction: ordi- nary or comitant strabismus, which occurs mainly in children, and paralytic or noncomitant strabismus, found mainly in adults.

Ordinary or comitant strabismus involves a malfunc- tion of the oculomotor control centers. The angle of deviation is approximately the same in all directions of gaze. This type often results in visual acuity loss in one eye (amblyopia); diplopia is uncommon. The impairment rating is based on the visual acuity loss (see Chapter 12).

Paralytic or noncomitant strabismus is due to a pare- sis of one of the oculomotor nerves and muscles. The angle of deviation of the visual axes varies with the direction of gaze. Diplopia (double vision) is com- mon. Occlusion of one eye eliminates the diplopia but may have undesirable side effects (such as reduc- tion of the binocular field of vision).

If diplopia exists only in the extremes of gaze, it does not interfere with general ADL skills. If double vision exists at or near the primary direction of gaze, it (or the necessary occlusion) may interfere with ADL skills and would warrant an impairment rating. Assessment should be based on well-documented, individualized considerations as discussed in Chapter 12.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-33
25% Vision Impairment Due to Sixth Nerve Palsy, With Concurrent Peripheral Neuropathy

Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; 4-month history of seeing objects double, especially when looking to the right. He has also complained of burning, pins- and-needles sensation in his feet, mainly at night.
Current Symptoms: Persistent double vision on looking to the right interferes with performing some ADL. Burning sensation in his feet prevents him from obtaining a good night’s sleep.
Physical Exam: Double vision is present on forward fixation and worsens upon looking to the right side. Poor abduction of the right eye on looking into the right lateral field. Decreased distal percep- tion to pinprick and cold in both feet, with hyper- esthesias of the soles of his feet to compression.
Clinical Studies: Showed type 2 diabetes mellitus, moderately controlled.
Diagnosis: Sixth nerve palsy and peripheral neu- ropathy associated with diabetes mellitus.
Impairment Rating: Chapter 12 has no specific scale for diplopia. This individual can still read normal print but has reduced reading endurance and no reserve for small print. He is in the range of near-normal vision (see Table 12-2), which warrants an impairment rating of up to 25%.
Comment: Combine the visual impairment from any impairment due to his peripheral neuropathy.
---END EXAMPLE---

13.4d Cranial Nerve V—the Trigeminal Nerve
The trigeminal nerve is a mixed nerve with sensory fibers to the face, cornea, anterior scalp, nasal and oral cavities, tongue, and supratentorial dura mater. The nerve also transmits motor impulses to the mas- tication muscles.


Evaluate sensation in the parts served by the three major divisions of the trigeminal nerve with the usual techniques: pain, temperature, and touch. (See the description of loss of function due to sensory deficit, pain, or discomfort under section 13.9, Criteria for Rating Impairments of the Peripheral Nervous System, Neuromuscular Junction, and Muscular System.) Compare the two sides of the face or body. Bilateral facial sensation loss is uncom- mon. Combine the impairment percentage for sensa- tion loss that involves the trigeminal nerve with the estimated impairment percentage for pain or motor loss. Pin, cold, and light touch are the best parame- ters for localization of sensory findings on the face. They can outline impairment of either side of the face, a branch of, or complete trigeminal nerve impairment.

Brief episodic trigeminal neuralgia or postherpetic neuralgia that involves a branch of the trigeminal nerve may be very severe and uncontrolled. Because there usually is no documented neurologic impair- ment except for a trigger point with trigeminal neu- ralgia or allodynia with postherpetic neuralgia, severe, uncontrolled, typical pain may be the impair- ment. Both atypical, episodic facial pain and typical, neuralgic pain may be evaluated (see Table 13-11) if they have occurred for months and interfere with daily activities. Motor impairment of the trigeminal nerve may affect chewing, swallowing, and speech articulation and may be accompanied by pain or a tic. Bilateral impairment is rare and may be severe. Daily activities may precipitate the pain. Speech, chewing, and swallowing impairments are considered in Chapter 9, Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-34
15% to 24% Impairment Due to Trigeminal Neuralgia
Subject: 60-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; 3-month history of brief, sudden attacks of right-sided facial pain that radi- ates from the jaw to the mouth and up to the ear. These have occurred in the past with long remis- sions but now are more frequent.
Current Symptoms: Chewing, smiling, or hot or cold fluid touching the lower canine tooth triggers attacks of pain. Pain is described as a very severe, sudden, brief, electricity-like shock followed by severe pain. When the pain clears, she has no pain in her face until the next recurrence. No symp- toms between these sudden brief episodes.

Physical Exam: Normal, without demonstrable sen- sory impairment. Light stimulation of upper lip reproduces lightning-like painful sensations simi- lar to her history (trigger point).
Clinical Studies: None unless neurologic impair- ment is documented.
Diagnosis: Trigeminal neuralgia.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Pain may respond to carbamazepine and/or Lioresal, but these medications may not be tolerated in the elderly. Surgical intervention, such as stereotactic thermocoagulation of the gasserian ganglion, may be required, but this may leave the face unpleasantly numb. In this case, the uncon- trolled facial neuralgic pain interferes with daily, social, and interpersonal activities.
---END EXAMPLE---

Comment: This condition occurs in 30% of individ- uals with ophthalmic herpes. Pain may last for years and is associated with a high suicide risk because of severe uncontrolled neuralgic pain pre- venting normal usual activities.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-35
25% to 35% Impairment Due to Postherpetic Neuralgia
Subject: 70-year-old woman.
History: Left-handed; episode of herpes zoster rash in left V1 distribution.
Current Symptoms: Severe, nonstop burning and itching in this area. She cannot comb her hair or wash this area since touching makes it worse.
Physical Exam: White scars of herpes eruption and diminished discrimination of pain and light touch over the left upper face.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Postherpetic neuralgia.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person.


13.4e Cranial Nerve VII—the Facial Nerve The facial nerve is a nerve with both motor and sen- sory components. The motor part innervates the facial muscles of expression and accessory muscles for chewing and swallowing. The sensory fibers carry tactile sensations from a part of the external auditory canal, ear, tympanic membrane, soft palate and adjacent pharynx, and taste to the anterior two thirds of the tongue. Special fibers innervate the lacrimal and salivary glands.

Sensory loss related to facial nerve impairment does not interfere with activities of daily living. Loss of taste usually is not considered to be a major impair- ment. See Table 13-12 for impairment criteria.
Unilateral motor impairment poses a risk of vision impairment because of blinking loss and corneal injury. Eating and speaking also can be affected.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-36
5% to 19% Impairment Due to Bell’s Palsy

Subject: 40-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; 4 months ago, individual developed a “numbness sensation” of the forehead and right side of the face over the course of 2 to 3 days. She also noted drooling from the right side of her mouth when drinking coffee and occasion- ally bit the right side of her tongue.
Current Symptoms: Total loss of movement of the right side of the face with persistent elevation of the right eyelid without voluntary control of clo- sure. Increased sensitivity to sound in the right ear.
Physical Exam: Mild to moderate loss of motility of the forehead on the right and complete loss of motility of the lower right side of the face and eye- lid elevation. No reportable perception of vinegar on the right side of the tongue. No other cranial nerve or long tract signs. Congestion of the con- junctiva of the right eye and apparent irritation.
Clinical Studies: Electromyogram (EMG) of the facial muscle may be considered.
Diagnosis: Bell’s palsy, unilateral.
Impairment Rating: 19% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Corticosteroids may be considered in the first days of Bell’s palsy to shorten the course.
Most but not all affected individuals lose taste on the anterior two thirds of the tongue. The major problem is to protect the cornea from drying, since the eyelid does not close spontaneously or voluntarily. EMG may be helpful when considera- tion for innervation is under way.
---END EXAMPLE---
13.4f Cranial Nerve VIII—the Vestibulocochlear Nerve
Cranial nerve VIII is composed of nerves from two adjacent nuclei. The cochlear portion of the nerve is concerned with hearing, and the vestibular portion of the nerve is concerned with vertigo and position and orientation in space. See Chapter 11 for evaluation of hearing impairment without known nerve dysfunction.

Tinnitus in the presence of unilateral hearing loss may impair speech discrimination and adversely influence the ability to carry out daily activities, especially in crowds or noisy places. Therefore, add up to 5% to the impairment evaluation for severe unilateral hearing loss due to tinnitus when ADL are affected.

Dysfunction of the vestibular part of the eighth nerve may be unilateral or bilateral. The impaired person may or may not be able to compensate for a unilat- eral loss. With bilateral loss of vestibular function, equilibrium and station are dependent on other sys- tems, such as those for visual cues and kinesthetic senses; however, those systems may be inadequate for normal movement or ambulation.

Vertigo is the most disturbing symptom of vestibular dysfunction and is seldom, if ever, minor. Associated symptoms include nausea, vomiting, headache, fear of movement, ataxia, and nystagmus. Movement or environmental object movement may worsen these uncomfortable symptoms. Vertigo as a single entity is evaluated in Chapter 11. Equilibrium and balance impairment is significant if daily activities are lim- ited. See Table 13-13 for criteria for rating impair- ment of the vestibulocochlear nerve. Criteria of vestibular impairment are detailed in the section dis- cussing equilibrium in Chapter 11, Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures.


13.4g Cranial Nerves IX and X—the Glossopharyngeal and Vagus Nerves These are mixed nerves that supply sensory fibers
chiefly to the posterior one third of the tongue and to the pharynx, larynx, and trachea. Involvement of the glossopharyngeal nerve by neuralgia usually is self- limiting or treatable and not permanent; the nerve’s involvement may cause a condition similar to trigem- inal (V) nerve tic or neuralgia. If the neuralgia per- sists uncontrolled for a period of months, the physician may be justified in assigning a percentage of impairment that is similar to trigeminal nerve impairment (use Table 13-11). Sensory impairments may contribute to difficulties with breathing, swal- lowing, speaking, and visceral functions.

13.4h Cranial Nerve XI—the Spinal Accessory Nerve
This nerve assists the vagus nerve in supplying some of the muscles of the larynx and innervates the cervi- cal parts of the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles. Impairment of this nerve is judged accord- ing to the effects on swallowing and speech, which are considered in Chapter 11, Ear, Nose, Throat, and Related Structures. This nerve also can affect head turning and shoulder motion; related impairments are evaluated according to criteria in Guides Chapters 15, The Spine, and 16, The Upper Extremities.


13.4i Cranial Nerve XII—the Hypoglossal Nerve
This is a motor nerve that innervates the musculature of the tongue. Unilateral loss of function is not con- sidered to be impairment. Bilateral loss may result in impaired swallowing, breathing, and speech articula- tion (see Table 13-14). Speech articulation and swal- lowing are considered in Chapter 11.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-37
15% to 39% Impairment Due to Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

Subject: 45-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; individual has developed progressive weakness of the hands and legs with wasting of the musculature over the past 6 months.
Current Symptoms: Choking and frequent cough- ing during meals. Difficulty swallowing, with occasional nasal regurgitation of fluids and chok- ing during meals. Voice has become hoarse and difficult to understand. He has lost 9.0 kg (20 lb).
Physical Exam: Severe wasting of the musculature of both hands; however, he can lift his arms and legs against gravity with difficulty. He was drool- ing from his mouth with a tenacious saliva, which he caught in a handkerchief. Speech was soft with poor articulation, and tongue showed wormlike fasciculations. He also had fasciculations of the hands, arms, and thighs. The deep-tendon reflexes were diminished in the arms and increased at the knee with up-going toes. No sensory impairments.
Clinical Studies: EMG: evidence of denervation by fibrillations, positive sharp waves, and increased insertional activity in all limbs. Neuroimaging and swallowing studies may be appropriate.
Diagnosis: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Impairment Rating: 39% impairment due to swal- lowing disorder associated with amyotrophic lat- eral sclerosis; combine with appropriate ratings due to other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: The most disturbing and potentially dan- gerous symptom of this terrible condition is the individual’s inability to control his secretions, put- ting him at risk for aspiration.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-38
40% to 60% Impairment Due to Nondominant-Side Hemiplegia and Hemianopia

Subject: 65-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; 4 months ago, this hyperten- sive diabetic woman developed transient episodes of weakness and numbness of the left side of her face, arm, and leg, which progressed to a complete loss of motility and sensation on the left side.
Current Symptoms: Left-sided weakness, with inability to move the left arm or leg and loss of some movement of the left lower face. Difficulty controlling fluids, with frequent nasal regurgita- tion and aspiration, particularly of liquids or semi- solids. Bedridden and requires assistance in all activities of daily living.
Physical Exam: Flaccid left hemiplegia; unable to elevate left arm or leg. Mild to moderate weak- ness of the left lower face, with drooling.
Frequent choking and nasal regurgitation with liq- uids and semisolids. Confrontation fields show a dense left homonymous hemianopia. Decreased sensation to pin, cold, and vibration of the left arm and leg. Up-going toe on the left.
Clinical Studies: CT scan: large intracranial hemor- rhage in the right basal ganglia thalamic area.
Swallowing studies: unable to control secretions and aspiration of the dye.
Diagnosis: Late effect of CVA with nondominant side hemiplegia and hemianopia.
Impairment Rating: 60% impairment due to inablil- ity to swallow or handle oral secretions without choking due to nondominant-side hemiplegia; combine with appropriate ratings for other neuro- logic impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: This severe CVA has not improved and has left this woman completely dependent on oth- ers, bedridden, with frequent aspirations of her meals and medications.
---END EXAMPLE---

13.5 Criteria for Rating Impairments of Station, Gait, and Movement
	Disorders
13.5a Station and Gait Disorders
Problems maintaining balance and a stable gait can develop from a CNS or peripheral neurologic impair- ment. On physical examination, the physician may observe loss of equal arm or leg movement, falling or staggering to one or the other side, inability to control starting or stopping, and arrhythmic body or extremity movements. Increased tone in the lower extremities from a CNS lesion such as traumatic


brain injury, stroke, or multiple sclerosis may result in a spastic paraparesis or spasticity in one limb.
Loss of station or Romberg sign (falling with eyes closed) may indicate dysfunction in the peripheral nerves or their ascending pathways to the brain.
Peripheral neuropathy, identified by examination and electrodiagnostic tests, is frequently associated with complaints of imbalance or stumbling, since infor- mation from sensory receptors is altered.

Impairment ratings for station and gait disorders are determined according to the effect on ambulation (see Table 13-15). Other anatomic or functional changes from other body systems, such as the mus- culoskeletal system, are combined with the neuro- logic assessment for station and gait.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-39
20% to 39% Impairment Due to Station and Gait Disorders

Subject: 50-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; 6-month history of progres- sive weakness of arms and legs, with unsteady and falling gait.
Current Symptoms: Unable to walk without assis- tance; has difficulty rising from a chair.
Physical Exam: Wasting and loss of muscle mass, mainly in the distal extremities, with diminished deep-tendon reflexes in the arms and increased deep-tendon reflexes in the legs, with up-going toes. No sensory impairment. Unable to get out of a chair without assistance or to walk unaided without falling.
Clinical Studies: EMG: confirmed the motor neuron defect. CT myelogram of the cervical spine: nega- tive for myelopathy secondary to spondylosis.
Diagnosis: Motor neuron disease, probable ALS.
Impairment Rating: 39% station and gait impair- ment due to motor neuron disease; combine with appropriate ratings due to other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impair- ment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: The major impairment rating is based on the gait disorder, to be combined with the other neurologic impairments.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-40
40% to 60% Impairment Due to Station and Gait Disorders

Subject: 60-year-old man.

History: Right-handed; sudden onset of inability to use right arm and leg 4 months ago; subsequently wheelchair bound.
Current Symptoms: Able to ambulate only with assistance and needs help standing up.
Physical Exam: Spastic right hemiplegia with increased resistance to passive stretch. Distal weakness in the right hand and foot against grav- ity. Diminished rapid rhythmical alternating movements and hyperreflexia, with up-going toe. Hemisensory defect present. Uses a walker.
Clinical Studies: CT scan of the brain: left cerebral infarct without hemorrhage.
Diagnosis: Late effect of CVA with dominant-side hemiplegia.
Impairment Rating: 55% whole person station and gait impairment due to dominant-side hemiplegia; combine with appropriate ratings due to other neu- rologic impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: The cerebral functional loss needs to be combined with the dominant hemispheric hand problems and hemisensory defect (see Table 13-16).
---END EXAMPLE---

13.5b Movement Disorders
Movement disturbances resulting from cerebral dys- function are impairments that may affect activities of daily living. Mild tics may have no impact on daily activities, while other involuntary movements, such as tremors (resting, postural, and intention), chorea, athetosis, hemiballismus, and dystonia tone may pre- vent meaningful use of the extremity. Besides abnor- mal movements, difficulty with coordination for dexterous or precise movements may interfere with activity; these difficulties can develop from lesions in the basal ganglia or cerebellum. Coordinated move- ments include gait that may manifest as ataxia requir- ing use of an ancillary device. Movement disorders, therefore, are assessed for their interference with ADL as described in Tables 13-15, 13-16, and 13-17. For movement disorders affecting the lower extremi- ties, use the station and gait section.


13.6 Criteria for Rating Impairments of Upper Extremities Related to Central
	Impairment
The basic tasks of everyday living depend on dexter- ous use of the dominant upper extremity. Loss of use of that extremity results, in most instances, in greater impairment than would be the case with impairment of the limb on the nondominant side.
Tables 13-16 and 13-17 are used to rate upper extremity dysfunction from any lesion in the brain. Use these tables for rating upper extremity dysfunc- tion, manifested by weakness, tremor, or pain, that affects ADL. The upper extremity impairment
may result from, but is not limited to, traumatic


brain injury, stroke, neurodegenerative diseases (eg, Parkinson’s disease, progressive supranuclear palsy), multiple sclerosis, and sequelae of CNS infection.

When the spinal cord disorder affects both upper extremities, the individual’s impairment is greater than indicated by a simple combination of impairments of the dominant and nondominant extremities. For these cases, Chapter 15, which covers neurologic impair- ment from spinal cord disorders, and other sections in this chapter should be used.

The impairment ratings given in Tables 13-16 and 13-17 are determined from neurologic examination of motor strength, coordination, and dexterity.
Functional activities such as buttoning a shirt, lacing shoes, writing, and performing a pegboard task can assess abilities needed for daily activities.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-41
39% Impairment Due to Dominant-Side Hemiplegia

Subject: 60-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; sudden onset of inability to use right arm and leg 4 months ago; subsequently wheelchair bound.
Current Symptoms: Able to ambulate only with assistance and needs help standing up.
Physical Exam: Spastic right hemiplegia with increased resistance to passive stretch. Distal weakness in the right hand and foot against grav- ity. Diminished rapid rhythmical alternating move- ments and hyperreflexia with up-going toe.
Hemisensory defect present. Uses a walker and has difficulties with many activities of daily living.
Clinical Studies: CT scan of the brain: left cerebral infarct without hemorrhage.
Diagnosis: Late effects of CVA with dominant-side hemiplegia.
Impairment Rating: 39% impairment due to dominant-side upper limb hemiplegia; combine with appropriate ratings due to other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impair- ment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: This individual also had a 55% impair- ment for gait that, when combined with the 39% impairment for hemiplegia, equals 73% whole person impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-42
60% Impairment Due to Dominant-Side Hemiplegia


Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; severe sudden onset of right hemiplegia, hemisensory defect, and hemianopia 5 months ago. Minimal improvement in orienta- tion, in communication, and of lateral neurologic impairments.
Current Symptoms: Dependent on others for ADL, including feeding, toileting care, and dressing.
Unable to clearly express himself and profess needs. Generalized weakness, in addition to hemi- plegia, make individual wheelchair bound with the need for transfer aids.
Physical Exam: Paresis and flaccidity of right arm and leg with persistence of sensory loss and hemi- anopia. Total dependence on others for all ADL.
Clinical Studies: CT scan: massive intracerebral hemorrhage, bilateral with effacement on ventri- cles. EEG: bilateral delta slow waves without dis- charges.
Diagnosis: Late effect of CVA with dysphasia, dominant-side hemiplegia, and homonymous hemianopia.
Impairment Rating: 60% impairment due to dominant-side hemiplegia; combine with appro- priate ratings due to other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: Involvement of the extremity secondary to a central lesion needs to be combined with rat- ings from the other tables, including dysphasia (Table 13-7), gait (Table 13-15), and vision impairments (Tables 13-9 and 13-10).
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-43
80% Impairment of Both Upper Extremities

Subject: 50-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; 6-month history of progres- sive weakness of arms and legs, with unsteady and falling gait.
Current Symptoms: Unable to walk without assis- tance; has difficulty rising from a chair.
Physical Exam: Wasting and loss of muscle mass, mainly in the distal extremities, with diminished deep-tendon reflexes in the arms and increased deep-tendon reflexes in the legs, with up-going toes. No sensory impairment. Unable to get out of a chair without assistance or to walk unaided without falling. Unable to perform activities of daily living.
Clinical Studies: EMG: confirmed the motor neuron defect. CT myelogram of the cervical spine: nega- tive for myelopathy secondary to spondylosis.
Diagnosis: Motor neuron disease, probable ALS.
Impairment Rating: 80% whole person bilateral upper extremity severe impairment due to motor neuron disease; combine with appropriate ratings due to other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604; 80% and 39% for gait impairment = 88% whole person impairment).
Comment: The major impairment rating is based on the gait disorder, to be combined with the other neurologic impairments.
13.7
Criteria for
Rating Spinal Cord and Related
	Impairments
The spinal cord conveys nerve impulses for motor, sensory, and visceral functions. Disorders of impulse transmission can result in permanent impairment.
The magnitude of the impairment is estimated according to the effects on the ability to perform activities of daily living and the results of neurologic examination and testing. See Chapter 15, The Spine, for spine impairment rating by neurologic level of involvement.
---END EXAMPLE---
Impairments resulting from spinal cord injuries and other adverse conditions include those relating to sta- tion and gait, use of the upper extremities, respira- tion, urinary bladder function, anorectal function, sexual function, and pain.

Sensory disturbances, including the loss of sense of touch, sense of pain, temperature perception, and sense of vibration and joint position, and paresthe- sias, dysesthesias, and phantom limb sensations may indicate spinal cord dysfunction. Autonomic system disorders, including disturbances in sweating pat- terns, regulation of circulation, and regulation of temperature, may occur. Impairment is determined according to the amount of functional impairment and the level of involvement.

When an individual with a spinal cord injury has impairments of several functions or systems, for instance, those of station and gait (Table 13-15), as with hemiparesis and ataxia; of dexterity in using the upper extremity (Tables 13-16 and 13-17); and of bladder, bowel, or sexual functioning, the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) should be used to combine the whole person impairment estimates for the several functions.


Accompanying disorders, such as trophic lesions, urinary calculi, osteoporosis, nutritional distur- bances, infections, and reactive psychological states, may occur. The degree to which any of these condi- tions augments spinal cord impairment should be based on the criteria given in the Guides chapters dealing with those disorders.

13.7a Respiratory System Neurologic Impairments
Neurologic impairment of one’s ability to breathe is considered in Table 13-18 only in terms of neuro- logic limitations. Other aspects of respiratory func- tion are covered in Chapter 5, The Respiratory System.


13.7 b Urinary System Neurologic Impairments
The ability to control bladder emptying provides the criterion for evaluating permanent bladder impair- ment resulting from spinal cord and central nervous system disorders (see Table 13-19). Documentation by cystometric or other tests may be necessary.

When evaluating impairments of the bladder, the physician also must consider the status of the upper urinary tract. Refer to Chapter 7, The Urinary and Reproductive Systems, and apply the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) if impairments of several organ systems are present.


13.7c Anorectal System Neurologic Impairments
The ability to control emptying provides the criterion for evaluating permanent impairment of the anus and rectum due to spinal cord or other neurologic dys- function (see Table 13-20).


13.7d Sexual System Neurologic Impairments
Awareness and capability of having an orgasm are the criteria for evaluating permanent impairment of sex- ual functioning that may result from spinal cord or other neurologic system disorders (see Table 13-21). The individual’s previous sexual functioning should be considered by the physician; age is only one crite- rion for evaluating previous sexual functioning.
Adjust for age according to criteria outlined in Chapter 7, The Urinary and Reproductive Systems.


13.8 Criteria for Rating Impairments Related to Chronic
	Pain
Impairment due primarily to intractable pain may greatly influence an individual’s ability to function. Psychological factors can influence the degree and perception of pain: different individuals in similar cir- cumstances may be impaired by pain to different degrees. A chronic pain syndrome may follow thala- mic lesions, but this is rare. Chronic pain in this sec- tion covers the diagnoses of causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, and reflex sympathetic dystrophy. The new term complex regional pain syndrome, type I and type II, is not used here since it does not represent a single diagnostic criterion.16

Causalgia is burning pain that develops in a distal extremity following trauma to a peripheral nerve. The burning pain is triggered by movement, light mechanical stimuli to the skin, and strong emotion. Other features include distal extremity swelling and skin that is smooth, mottled, cold, and sweaty.
Sympathetic block frequently relieves the pain. In posttraumatic neuralgia, the burning pain in the dis- tribution of a nerve does not have the other clinical features and does not spread.

Reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD) occurs with- out known nerve lesions and is precipitated by minor soft tissue trauma. Burning spontaneous pain and stimulus-evoked pain are most pronounced in the


distal limb (allodynia, hyperpathia, and hyperalge- sia). The affected limb is usually warmer acutely (less than 6 months) and then is colder. It is now gen- erally believed that a central nervous system abnor- mality is present based on the autonomic changes of abnormal sweating and skin blood flow. The acute distal swelling usually responds to sympathetic block. In the chronic stage, trophic changes include alteration in nail and hair growth, thin shiny skin, osteoporosis, and restriction of passive movement.
Postural or action tremor is not uncommon, while an associated movement disorder is relatively rare.

To rate these conditions for impairment, diagnosis is key and is based on clinical criteria. Besides the clini- cal findings previously described, a three-phase bone scan may show increased uptake in the acute and sub- acute periods. This study is known to have low sensi- tivity, 50%,17 and therefore cannot be used as a required criterion for the diagnosis. Plain x-rays may show patchy demineralization, particularly in a peri- articular distribution, within months of the onset of RSD. Altered blood flow by laser Doppler flowmetry and abnormal function in the sudomotor reflex also support the diagnosis. It is difficult to examine indi- viduals who are experiencing these symptoms; there- fore, once the criteria for the diagnosis have been met, the impact on ADL is determined.

To rate an impairment for causalgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, and RSD in an upper extremity, use Table 13-22. If a lower extremity needs to be rated for casualgia, posttraumatic neuralgia, or RSD, use
the station and gait impairment criteria given in Table 13-15.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-44
25% to 39% Impairment Due to Posttraumatic Neuralgia of the Superficial Radial Nerve

Subject: 45-year-old man.
History: Right-handed; developed burning pain in the distribution of the right superficial radial nerve following a routine venipuncture. Use of a trans- cutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) unit provided some relief.
Current Symptoms: Pain increases with attempts to grip or pinch the right hand. Pain is limited
to the distribution of the superficial radial nerve. Difficulty using the right hand for bathing, dress- ing, combing hair, and writing.
Physical Exam: Right hand is cold, edematous, with trophic changes and hyperesthesia over the radial distribution.
Diagnosis: Posttraumatic neuralgia of the superficial radial nerve secondary to injury.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Because of its location, damage to the superficial radial nerve occurs from glass, knives, power saws, and surgeries, especially de Quervain’s tenosynovectomy. This condition can be so severe that some ADL are not possible.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-45
40% to 60% Impairment Due to Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy

Subject: 30-year-old woman.
History: Right-handed; right carpal tunnel release 1 year ago. While recovering from the surgery, she developed diffuse burning pain in the hand, extending to the forearm, accompanied by

swelling of the right hand. Several stellate gan- glion blocks temporarily relieved the pain and reduced the swelling. Over time, she noted color changes and increased sweating; the hand was always cold, and movement of the fingers and wrist was limited. A TENS unit was used con- stantly, along with medication, to control the pain.
Current Symptoms: Deep burning pain, increased sweating, right arm weakness, and inability to use the hand for any daily activities.
Physical Exam: Right arm held close to the body in a protected fashion. The hand is dusky with a sweaty palm, and the skin is thinned. Fingers are tightly adducted and cannot be separated.
Attempts to move the wrist produce allodynia (occurrence of pain from a painless stimulus, eg, touch). Proximal muscles have poor tone and dis- use atrophy.
Clinical Studies: Three-phase bone scan: unremark- able; plain radiograph: diffuse demineralization.
Diagnosis: Reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD).
Impairment Rating: 40% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: RSD does not have a preexisting psycho- logical substrate; sufferers may become anxious and depressed because of failed therapies.
---END EXAMPLE---

13.9 Criteria for Rating Impairments of the Peripheral Nervous System, Neuromuscular Junction, and
	Muscular System
Evaluating the peripheral nervous system requires documentation of the extent of loss of function due to sensory deficit, pain, or discomfort; loss of muscu- lar strength and control of specific muscles or groups of muscles; and alteration of autonomic nervous sys- tem (ANS) control. Documentation of these deficien- cies should include, if possible, descriptions of the abnormal finding on examinations of the spinal root(s), portion of the plexus, and/or peripheral nerve(s) that are involved. The mechanism or cause


of the abnormality assists in determining the impair- ment duration and probable prognosis. Ancillary testing by neuroimaging (CT scans, MRIs, radi- ographs) and physiologic (EMG, nerve conduction velocity [NCV], and evoked responses) tests, may assist in reaching final conclusions.

Neurologic evaluation of pain is based first on the individual’s description of the character, location, intensity, duration, and persistence of the discomfort and on verification of the anatomic distribution of the neurologic defect. A description of the ways and the degrees to which the pain interferes with the indi- vidual’s performance of activities of daily living and the factors that augment the discomfort should be included. Anatomic descriptions should be made according to the usual distributions of the roots, plexuses, and nerves of the nervous system when the distal digital nerves are being evaluated, especially in the hand, as indicated in Chapters 15 and 16.

Grading procedures for sensory and motor impair- ments in single distal digital nerves of the hand are found in Chapter 16, The Upper Extremities. For evaluations of neurologic problems of the peripheral neuromuscular system, the standard techniques of neurologic examination are used (see Tables 13-23 and 13-24). The muscle strength grading system (Table 13-24) is similar to the system recommended by the Medical Research Council of the United Kingdom. Involvement of peripheral nerves or roots may lead to paralysis or weakness of the muscles supplied by them, as well as to characteristic sensory changes. The system of the Medical Research Council18 is the one recommended in the Guides for evaluating muscle function and testing impairments (Table 13-23). In this system, movement of the part is tested against the examiner’s resistance plus grav- ity, without the effect of gravity, against gravity, and for slight or no movement. The contralateral extrem- ity is tested also, and the results are compared with those in the affected limb.

Symptoms of sensory deficits and pain in peripheral nerves as described in Chapter 16, The Upper Extremities, include anesthesia, hypesthesia, dysesthe- sia, paresthesia, hyperesthesia, cold intolerance, and an intense, burning pain. Sensory dysfunction associ- ated with peripheral nerve disorders is evaluated according to the following criteria: (1) How does the pain or sensory deficit interfere with the individual’s performance of daily activities? (2) To what extent does the pain or sensory deficit follow the defined anatomic pathways of the root, plexus, or peripheral nerve? (3) To what extent does the description of the

pain or sensory deficit indicate that it is caused by a peripheral nerve abnormality? (4) To what extent does the pain or sensory deficit correspond to other disturbances of the involved nerve structure? Only persistent pain or discomfort that leads to permanent loss of function, in spite of maximum effort toward medical rehabilitation and allowing an optimal period of time for physiologic adjustment, should be evaluated as a permanent impairment. Pain that does not meet more than one of the above criteria is not considered to be within the scope of this section.

Pain is defined in Chapter 18 as “an unpleasant sen- sory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage or described in terms of such damage.” Pain is a subjective symptom and is difficult to evaluate, but its presence, anatomic back- ground, and intensity may be verified with a thorough examination. Chronic pain for causalgia, posttrau- matic neuralgia, and RSD is evaluated in Table 13-22.

Motivation and malingering as they may relate to the presence or absence of an impairment or a supposed impairment are considered in Chapter 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders.

Sensory dysfunction, to be rated, must be considered permanent. The methodology used for spinal nerves, brachial plexus, and individual nerves is described below. Terms used to describe sensory impairment that may not be readily apparent to all readers are defined. Sensation refers to the sensory perception of the primary sensory modalities, pain, heat, cold, and touch, those involved in protective sensation.
Sensibility refers to the discriminative features of sensation such as graphesthesia, stereognosis, or two-point discrimination. The issue of sensibility is important to the normal function of the hand. This is
why sensory loss in the digits is focused on impaired two-point discrimination (see Table 16-10).

Grading procedures for sensory and/or motor impair- ments in all peripheral nerves (except sensory loss in the digits (Table 16-10) is found in Tables 13-23 and 13-24. The maximum impairment for spinal roots, brachial plexus, and individual nerves is noted under the respective sections below.


13.9a Roots of Spinal Nerves
Spinal nerves are evaluated by loss of function in the peripheral nerve that receives contribution from the involved spinal root. If two or more spinal roots are involved, the increased loss of function from the con- tribution of two spinal roots to a peripheral nerve


necessitates that the impairment be rated according to the brachial plexus (see Section 13.8b).

Table 16-13 provides the maximum upper extremity impairment due to unilateral sensory or motor deficits of individual spinal roots C5 through T1. Once the sensory deficit or pain is estimated according to
Table 13-23 and motor deficit according to 13-24, these percent deficits in the upper extremity are mul- tiplied by the respective maximum sensory and/or motor impairments of the spinal nerve in question, Table 16-18. The sensory and motor impairments are combined using the Combined Values Chart, p. 604, for the total upper extremity impairment, which is then converted to whole person impairment (Table 16-3). If deficits are bilateral, the whole person impairment is found for each extremity and then combined using the Combined Values Chart.

For the spinal roots in the lower extremity, L3 through S1, use Table 15-18 to determine the maximum lower

extremity impairment due to unilateral sensory or motor deficits. Follow the same procedure already outlined for the upper extremity with regard to grading the impairment; use Tables 13-23 and
13-24, then multiply by the maximum loss of function for the nerve root in question and combine sensory and motor impairment and convert to whole person impairment.


13.9b Brachial Plexus
The anatomy of the brachial plexus and clinical pres- entation resulting from lesions that involve the upper and lower trunk are presented in Section 16.5b. Table 16-14 provides the maximum impairment due to unilateral sensory or motor deficits of the brachial plexus by the entire brachial plexus and the upper, middle, and lower trunks. If there is partial recovery, individual muscles are graded according to Table
13-24. This value is multiplied by the maximum upper extremity impairment for the nerve innervating


the muscle listed in Table 16-15. Results from all the muscles are combined using the Combined Values Chart, p. 604, and the total upper extremity impair- ment converted to a whole person impairment, Table 16-3. A very useful diagram that demonstrates the motor innervation of all muscles in the upper extrem- ity by spinal roots, peripheral nerve, and anatomical proximal-distal location in the upper extremity is found on Figure 16-47.


13.9 c Peripheral Nerve Impairments
This section is used to rate sensory and motor impairments from individual nerve lesions or multi- ple nerve disorders such as polyneuropathy or mononeuritis multiplex. Grading procedures for sen- sory and motor impairments resulting from periph- eral nerve disorders in the upper and lower extremities are found in Tables 13-23 and 13-24.
This percent impairment is multiplied by the appro- priate maximum loss of function for the nerve in

question due to sensory deficit and pain or motor deficit, Table 16-15 for the upper extremity and Table 17-37 for the lower extremity. Sensory and motor impairments of the upper extremity are com- bined using the Combined Values Chart, page 604. The result is converted to a whole person impair- ment, Table 16-3.

If multiple nerves are involved in one extremity, the same procedure is followed for each nerve. Once the sensory and motor impairments for each nerve have been combined using the Combined Values Chart, all the nerves rated in one extremity are combined, again using the Combined Values Chart to determine the total impairment in the affected limb. If more than one limb is involved, each total extremity impairment is converted to a whole person impair- ment (Table 16-3), and these values are again com- bined using the Combined Values Chart.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-46
5% Impairment Due to Mononeuropathy in the Lower Extremity

Subject: 60-year-old woman.
History: Individual has diabetes mellitus; developed a persistent and painful numbness of the right lower extremity over a 6-month period.
Current Symptoms: Dysesthesias involve the lat- eral aspect of the lower leg and extend in a more severe fashion down to the dorsum of the foot.
Physical Exam: Decreased perception of pinpoint, cold, and light touch on the dorsum of the foot extending to the upper lateral calf area; painful paresthesias and dysesthesias of the foot; and mild weakness of dorsiflexion of the foot with a mild foot drop, characteristic of a peroneal nerve neu- ropathy. Able to ambulate without a cane.
Clinical Studies: Nerve conduction studies: abnor- mal right peroneal nerve indicated focal slowing of the motor conduction velocity across the head of the fibula.

Diagnosis: Mononeuropathy of the peroneal nerve secondary to diabetes mellitus.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Method used to arrive at impairment rating:
  Loss of function due to motor involvement of the common peroneal nerve (strength): Maximum motor loss in the peroneal nerve is 15% whole person impairment (Table 17-37) ? 25% motor deficit, grade 4 (Table 13-24) = 4% whole person impairment.
  Loss of function due to sensory involvement of common peroneal nerve: 25% representing sensory loss (Table 13-23) ? 2% representing sensory func- tion of common peroneal nerve (Table 17-37) = 0.5%, or 1% whole person impairment (rounded).
  A 4% whole person impairment combined with a 1% whole person impairment is a 5% whole person impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 13-47
31% Impairment Due to Sensorimotor Polyneuropathy

Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: Prolonged episode of severe nausea, vomit- ing, and diarrhea, followed by onset of intense paresthesias, burning pain, and muscle tenderness.
Current Symptoms: Paresthesias in extremities with weakness in the feet and—less so—in the hands. Gait is unsteady
Physical Exam: Weakness more profound distally than proximally in the limb. Reflexes diminished in the upper extremities and difficult to obtain at the knees and ankles. Sensory examination intact for pin but diminished for vibration and joint position in the feet and hands. Mees’ lines in the fingernails and toenails; desquamating brown rash on the palms and soles.
Clinical Studies: Nerve conduction studies 2 months after the onset of symptoms: no motor or sensory responses. Needle EMG: spontaneous activity (denervation potentials) in the distal muscles with impaired recruitment. Pancytopenia with basophilic stippling of the red blood cells. Elevated arsenic levels present in the hair and nails.
Diagnosis: Arsenic neuropathy involving motor and sensory fibers.

Impairment Rating: 31% impairment due to senso- rimotor polyneuropathy; combine with appropri- ate ratings due to other neurologic impairments to determine whole person impairment. See method used to arrive at impairment rating below.
Comment: The presentation of a distal dying-back neuropathy, as in this case of arsenic neuropathy, is typical of the majority of toxic neuropathies. Removal from exposure is associated with improvement of findings in the peripheral nervous system, but the amount of recovery is related to the severity of the initial insult. As in this case, significant distal weakness in the intrinsic mus- cles of the hands and feet and moderate weakness in the dorsiflexors and plantar flexors were pres- ent 1 year later. Diminished vibration in a stocking-glove distribution and position sense continued to interfere with gait and the perform- ance of dexterous activities with the hands. The individual complained of ongoing dysesthesia in the soles and cramping in the calves. Before rat- ing an impairment following neurotoxic exposure, adequate time must pass to allow for recovery to a relatively stable plateau.
---END EXAMPLE---

Method:
1. Loss of motor function in the distal muscles of the tibial nerve and peroneal nerve in the feet. The maximum motor loss (Table 17-37) for the medial plantar is 2% whole person impairment and for the lateral plantar is 2% whole person impairment ? 25% = grade 4 motor loss (Table 13-24) = 1% for the medial plantar and 1% for the lateral plantar. The maximum motor loss (Table 17-37) for the peroneal nerve in the foot of 5% whole person impairment (5% maxi- mum motor loss is attributed to the foot since the entire common peroneal motor impairment is 15% in Table 17-37) ? 25% = grade 4 motor loss (Table 13-24) = 1%. The total motor impairment in the distal muscles of one lower extremity is 1% and 1% and 1% = 3% whole person impairment.
2. Loss of function due to sensory involvement of
the medial and lateral plantar nerves, sural nerve, and superficial peroneal nerves. The maximum sensory loss (Table 17-37) is 2% for the medial plantar and 2% for the lateral plan- tar is 2% ? 40% = class 4 sensory loss (Table 13-23) = 1% for the medial plantar and 1% for the lateral plantar. The maximum sensory loss (Table 17-37) for the sural nerve is 1% ? 40%
= class 4 sensory loss (Table 13-23) = 0.4%, which is equal to 0% for the sural nerve. The maximum sensory loss (Table 17-37) for the superficial peroneal nerve is 2% ? 40% = class 4 sensory loss (Table 13-24) = 1% for the superficial peroneal nerve. The total sensory impairment in the foot is 1% and 1% + 0% and 1% = 3% whole person impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
3.
Loss of motor function in the hand from median and ulnar nerve dysfunction. The max- imum motor loss for the median nerve is 10% (Table 16-15) ? 15% from grade 4 motor loss
(Table 13-24) = 1.5% or 2% of the upper extremity impairment. The maximum motor loss for the ulnar nerve is 35% (Table 16-15) ? 15% from grade 4 motor loss (Table 13-24) = 5%. The total motor impairment in the hand is 2% and 5% = 7% whole person impairment (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
4. Loss of sensory function in the hand from median and ulnar nerve dysfunction. The maxi- mum sensory loss for the median nerve of 38% (Table 16-15) ? 15% from class 3 sensory loss (Table 13-23) = 6% of the upper extremity or 4% whole person impairment (Table 16-3). The maximum sensory loss for the ulnar nerve of 7% (Table 16-15) ? 15% from class 3 sensory loss (Table 13-23) = 1% of the upper extremity or 1% whole person impairment. The total sen- sory impairment in the hand is 4% and 1% = 5% whole person impairment.
5. Using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604), the motor and sensory impairment for the foot is 3% and 3% = 6% whole person impairment. The motor and sensory impairment in the hand is 7% and 5% = 12% whole person impair- ment. Since a sensorimotor polyneuropathy is a symmetric lesion, the 6% and 12% = 17% for one side is doubled to 17% and 17% = 31% whole person impairment.


13.9d Neuromuscular Impairments Neuromuscular impairment as present in long- standing myasthenia gravis or myasthenic syndromes is accompanied by proximal weakness; impairment is rated by the impact on activities of daily living.
For the lower extremities, station and gait are rated as described in activities of Table 13-15. The upper extremities are rated using Tables 13-16 and
13-17, which provide criteria for functional loss in one or both upper extremities.


13.9e Muscular Impairments
This is a varied group of disorders that includes mus- cular dystrophy, metabolic myopathy, abnormal potassium metabolism and muscle disease, endocrine myopathies, and inflammatory muscle disease. The unifying clinical feature is proximal weakness that, in some cases, may involve the neck and face. The proximal weakness is best rated by its effect on the activities of daily living. See Table 13-15 for the lower extremities and Tables 13-16 and 13-17 for functional loss in one or both upper extremities.

Neuromuscular and muscular impairments for the lower extremities are rated using Tables 17-6 and 17-8 (Chapter 17). Also, Table 13-15 is useful when gait is the most significant impairment from the neuromuscular or muscular disorder.

13.9f The Autonomic Nervous System
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) influences the functioning of many organ systems; thus, failure of the system can increase impairment. Neurologic con- ditions that have ANS involvement include polyneu- ropathy of various causes, familial dysautonomia, Landry-Guillain-Barré syndrome, syringomyelia, porphyria, cord and brain tumors, and myelopathy.

Lack of control of blood pressure, body thermal reg- ulation, and bladder and bowel elimination are prominent signs of ANS failure. Impairments related to transient loss of awareness or consciousness after a period of cerebral ischemia may be due to various mechanisms, including orthostasis, reflex actions, or cardiopulmonary disorders, and may be estimated by means of Table 13-2. Referring to other Guides chap- ters also may be necessary to estimate the magni- tudes of the impairments (Chapters 3 through 5).

Impairments of spinal nerves, roots, plexuses, or peripheral nerves by various diseases or injuries may be partial or complete, unilateral or bilateral, related to motor or sensory functions, with or without pain. Each of these attributes or characteristics should be evaluated. When there is bilateral involvement, the two unilateral impairments should be determined; then the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) should be used to estimate whole person impairment.


13.10 Nervous System Impairment Evaluation
	Summary
See Table 13-25 for an evaluation summary for the assessment of nervous system impairments.






================================================================================
Chapter 14: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Mental and Behavioral Disorders
14.1 Principles of Assessment
14.2 Psychiatric Diagnosis and Impairment
14.3 A Method of Evaluating Psychiatric Impairment
14.4 Assessing Impairment Severity
14.5 Examples of Impairment Due to Mental and Behavioral Disorders
14.6 Format of the Impairment Report
Introduction
This chapter discusses impairments due to mental disorders and considers behavioral impairment of function that may complicate any condition. As did Chapter 13 (The Central and Peripheral Nervous System), this chapter assesses the brain; however, here the emphasis is on evaluating brain function and its effect on behavior for mental disorders. Unlike the other chapters in the Guides, this chapter focuses more on the process of performing a mental and behavioral impairment assessment. Numerical impairment ratings are not included; however, instructions are given for how to assess an individ- ual’s abilities to perform activities of daily living.

The following revisions have been made for the fifth edition:

1. The importance of following the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV) criteria for determining a men- tal impairment is emphasized.1
2. The section on social security disability assess- ment has been removed. The Social Security Administration criteria focus on disability and work disability assessment, which is not the pur- pose of the AMA Guides. However, some of the


357


material in this chapter is taken directly from Social Security Administration (SSA) regulations.2-4
3. Additional case examples exemplify the relation- ship between diagnosis, typical symptoms and signs of the disorder, and the impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living. Examples are included for depression, personality disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The case examples, together with Table 14-1, should help clarify how, in common psychiatric disorders, one can provide a nonnumerical impairment rating. Some states have chosen to assign numerical per- centages to these categories.
4. A summary template of factors to be included in a psychiatric assessment has been added.

14.1 Principles of
	Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for per- forming and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluations.

Several principles, described below, are central to assessing mental impairment. A clear diagnosis is required to assess permanent mental or behavioral impairment. This diagnosis needs to be established according to DSM-IV criteria. The diagnosis is among the factors to be considered in assessing the severity and possible duration of the impairment, but it is not the sole criterion to be used.

Motivation for improvement may be a key factor in the severity and extent of an individual’s impairment, whether that impairment is physical or mental. The examiner needs to assess changes in motivation and whether problems in motivation are due to the illness or to secondary gains. Motivation is influenced by multiple factors, including the illness, as well as the individual’s personality, coping style, self-esteem, and self-confidence. These factors may change over time. The loss of motivation for even purely pleasur- able activities may be a sign or symptom of an ill- ness such as depression or schizophrenia. However, some individuals may be demoralized or in some way unmotivated to improve by external circum- stances (such as fiscal incentives to stay ill and main- tain health insurance).

Assessing impairment requires a thorough review of the history of the mental disorder, the history of the individual’s ability to function over time, and his or her response to treatment and rehabilitation.


14.1 a Interpretations of Symptoms and Signs
The individual’s own description of his or her func- tioning and limitations is an important source of information. Information from nonmedical sources, such as family members and others who have knowl- edge of the person, may be useful in indicating the level of functioning and the severity of the impair- ment.

Information concerning the individual’s behavior while performing activities of daily living is particu- larly useful in determining his or her ability to func- tion. Results of work evaluations and rehabilitation programs, as well as information from day programs, are also useful in assessing level of functioning.

Information from both medical and nonmedical sources may be used to obtain detailed descriptions of the individual’s activities of daily living, social functioning, concentration, persistence, pace, and ability to tolerate increased mental demands (stress). This information may be available from profession- als in community mental health centers, daycare cen- ters, and sheltered workshops, and it also can be provided by family members. If the descriptions from these sources are insufficiently detailed or in conflict with the observed clinical picture or the reports of others, it is necessary to resolve the incon- sistencies. Any gaps in the history should also be explained.

An individual’s level of functioning may vary con- siderably over time. The level of functioning at a specific time may seem relatively adequate or, con- versely, rather poor. Proper evaluation of an impair- ment must take into account variations in the level of functioning over time to arrive at a determination of severity. Thus, it is important to obtain evidence over a sufficiently long period of time before the date of examination. This evidence should include treatment notes, hospital discharge summaries, work evalua- tions, and rehabilitation progress notes if they are available.


14.1 b Description of Clinical Studies The use of well-standardized psychological tests, such as the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale
(WAIS) and the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-2 (MMPI-2) may improve diagnostic acumen and help establish the existence of a mental disorder. For example, the WAIS is useful in docu- menting mental retardation. Broad-based neuropsy- chological assessments using, for example, the Halstead-Reitan or the Luria-Nebraska batteries may be useful in determining deficiencies in brain func- tioning, particularly in individuals with subtle signs such as those that may be seen in traumatic brain injuries.

Taking a standardized test requires concentration, persistence, and pacing; thus, observing individuals during the testing process may yield useful informa- tion. The summary of test results should include the objective findings, a description of what occurred during the testing, and the test results. A report of intellectual assessment should include a discussion of whether the obtained intelligence quotient (IQ) score is considered to be valid and consistent with the individual’s impairment and degree of functional limitation.

14.2 Psychiatric
Diagnosis and
	Impairment
In general, the history, signs, and symptoms of a mental disorder should justify the diagnosis, which should be made according to DSM-IV criteria. If there is uncertainty about the exact diagnosis, the differential diagnosis should be discussed. Document adequate descriptions of impairments and functional limitations from the reports of professional sources, such as psychiatrists, psychologists, psychiatric nurses, psychiatric social workers, and health profes- sionals in hospitals and clinics. Data gathered over a period of years are particularly useful.

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, commonly known as DSM-IV, is a widely accepted classification system for mental disorders. It is similar to another system, the International Classification of Diseases (ICD), which also is in widespread use.5 The criteria for mental disorders include a wide range of signs, symptoms, and impairments. Many mental disorders are characterized by impairments in a number of

areas. DSM-IV calls for a multiaxial evaluation. Each of five axes refers to a different class of information. The first three axes constitute the major diagnostic categories. These include the major clinical syn- dromes and the conditions that are the focus of treat- ment (axis I), the personality and developmental disorders (axis II), and the physical disorders and conditions that may be relevant to understanding and managing the care of the individual (axis III). Axis IV, referring to psychosocial stressors, and axis V, referring to adaptive functioning, may be particularly important for assessing impairment severity. In par- ticular, axis V is a rating of the individual’s global functional capacity and, like disability, is related directly to the effects of impairments.

In some individuals it is not possible to make a deter- mination on the basis of the available information.
Under these circumstances, the examiner should not feel obligated to provide an opinion about which he or she is uncertain but should seek and review rele- vant information from additional sources, such as medical and employment records, before rendering an opinion. The examiner must also consider the effects that medication, motivation, and rehabilita- tion may have on the individual’s signs, symptoms, and ability to function. A detailed discussion of these factors follows.


14.2 a Effects of Medication
Attention must be given to the effects of medication on the individual’s signs, symptoms, and ability to function. Although psychoactive medications may control certain signs or symptoms, such as hallucina- tions, impaired attention span, restlessness, or hyper- activity, such treatment may not affect all impairments and limitations imposed by the mental disorder. If an individual’s symptoms are attenuated by psychoactive medications, the evaluator should focus particular attention on limitations that may per- sist. Those limitations should be used as measures of the impairment’s severity.

Psychoactive medications used to treat some mental illnesses may cause drowsiness, blunted affect, or unwanted effects involving various body systems. Moreover, medications necessary to control such symptoms as hallucinations may result in decreased motivation and level of activity. These side effects should be considered in evaluating the overall sever- ity of the individual’s impairment and ability to func- tion. As explained in Chapter 2, the evaluator may need to provide an impairment estimate for the drug’s side effects.


14.2 b Effects of Motivation
Assessing motivation is difficult because lack of motivation may be hard to distinguish from mental impairment and is, in fact, a classic symptom of schizophrenia. When is an individual lacking energy, concentration, and initiative depressed or autistically preoccupied, and when is the individual unmoti- vated? Ultimately, making this distinction requires a clinical judgment, which should be aided by careful investigation of the individual’s efforts and accom- plishments before the onset of the alleged impair- ment and a search for associated signs and symptoms of common mental disorders.

Motivation is a difficult issue for assessment since it is mutifactorial in nature, involving the following potential factors: (1) lack of motivation as a sign of illness such as depression or schizophrenia; (2) fear of losing entitlement or other benefits of being ill;
(3) a side effect of some neuroleptic medications;
(4) conscious malingering; (5) a consequence of demoralization of persons with any chronic illness;
(6) social network support for illness; and others. Thus, the determination of motivation is often non- empirical, and conclusions are all too often drawn on the basis of prejudice. Many times, an individual’s motivation is not well understood even after careful assessment.

Nevertheless, motivation is a link between impair- ment and disability. For some people, poor motiva- tion is a major cause of poor functioning. An individual’s underlying character may be important in determining whether he or she is motivated to ben- efit from rehabilitation. Personality characteristics usually remain unchanged throughout life. However, internal events and psychological reactions can influ- ence the course of illness. An individual who tends to be dependent, for example, may become even more dependent as his or her illness proceeds.


14.2 c Effects of Rehabilitation
Frequently, the degree of vocational limitation of the individual with impairment of function is of para- mount importance to the evaluator. This limitation may range from minimal to total. In addition, the severity of functional impairment may change with the course of the illness. When the individual needs less medical care, vocational skills may be intact, or the individual may have limitations that may or may not be reversible. The evaluator should judge the possible duration of the impairment that remains, whether remission is likely to be fast or slow, whether it will be partial or total, and whether the

impairment is likely to remain stable or to change. These considerations should contribute to the exam- iner’s judgment about the degree of impairment.

Rehabilitation is a sine qua non in the treatment of most people who have recovered or are recovering from the acute phase of a mental disorder, especially a major mental disorder. Even if it is not possible to effect total remission, an outcome may be considered worthwhile if it has been possible to move the indi- vidual’s functional impairment to a lesser degree.

While for some persons lack of motivation appears to be a major feature of continuing impairment and may be a major feature of an ongoing mental disor- der, many individuals who undergo proper rehabilita- tive measures, including some who have organic illnesses, achieve improvements in functioning.
Determining whether impaired functioning will per- sist is sometimes an imprecise science, and some degree of uncertainty about this prediction often exists. The use of the impairment label can be seen as pessimistic, providing an adverse prediction that may be self-fulfilling. However, the tendency for physicians and others to minimize psychiatric impairments must also be considered; this tendency may lead to failure to refer individuals for potentially helpful rehabilitative measures.

An important aspect of rehabilitation is the recogni- tion that an individual who is taking certain types of medication may be able to sustain a satisfactory degree of functioning, whereas without medication he or she might fail to do so. For instance, there may be only a slight problem in the thinking process while the person is taking a suitable medication but a severe one if he or she is not taking medication. The physician should note the individual’s performance with and without medication.

Another consideration is providing an employer the assurance that a worker who is taking the proper medication and is in an appropriate job can avoid injury both to himself or herself and to coworkers. An analogy is seen in the care and treatment of a worker who has seizures: in such an instance, informing and educating the worker, as well as his or her family, employer, and coworkers, are vital steps and should be a part of the rehabilitation process.

Just as there are degrees of impairment, total rehabil- itation may not be possible, as is the case in the great majority of individuals afflicted with schizophrenia. To use an analogy from physical medicine, it is essentially impossible for an amputated leg to be


replaced, and the affected individual cannot hope to regain perfect ambulation. However, a well-fitted prosthesis, accompanied by practice and training, can greatly improve the individual’s ability to walk. If, in addition, the individual obtains suitable trans- portation, he or she may be restored to full gainful employment. If normal ambulation is a job require- ment, an employer may be able to provide an alterna- tive position or to modify existing tasks so that they can be performed by an amputee making skillful use of a prosthesis.

Although the analogy between the loss of a limb and the loss of capability resulting from a mental disor- der has limitations, impairment from a mental disor- der can be just as real and severe as the impairment resulting from an injury or other illness. The link between motivation and recovery may need strength- ening in individuals who are impaired by either physical or mental illness. This task falls primarily to rehabilitationists and psychiatrists, but others can assist. An employer’s providing alternative tasks or modifying existing work conditions may be as much a part of restoring vocational possibilities to an indi- vidual with mental illness as it is to one recovering from an injury or to one who has elements of both mental and physical illness.


14.3 A Method of Evaluating Psychiatric
	Impairment
Percentages are not provided to estimate mental impairment in this edition of the Guides. Unlike cases with some organ systems, there are no precise measures of impairment in mental disorders. The use of percentages implies a certainty that does not exist. Percentages are likely to be used inflexibly by adju- dicators, who then are less likely to take into account the many factors that influence mental and behav- ioral impairment. In addition, the authors are unaware of data that show the reliability of the impairment percentages. After considering this diffi- cult matter, the Committee on Disability and Rehabilitation of the American Psychiatric Association advised Guides contributors against the use of percentages in the chapter on mental and behavioral disorders of the fourth edition, and that remains the opinion of the authors of the present chapter.

No available empirical evidence supports any method for assigning a percentage of impairment of the whole person; however, the following approach may be helpful in estimating the extent of mental impairments. Not everyone who has a mental or behavioral disorder is limited in the ability to per- form activities of daily living; however, there are individuals with less than chronic, but still unremit- ting, impairments who are severely limited in some areas of function.6

Translating specific impairments directly and pre- cisely into functional limitations is a complex and poorly understood process. Current research finds lit- tle relationship between such psychiatric signs and symptoms as those identified during a mental status examination and the ability to perform competitive work. However, four main categories exist that assess many areas of function: (1) ability to perform activities of daily living; (2) social functioning;
(3) concentration, persistence, and pace; and
(4) deterioration or decompensation in work or worklike settings. Independence, appropriateness, and effectiveness of activities should also be consid- ered. The four aspects of functional limitation are discussed below and can be linked, or causally related, to specific impairments as described in Table 14-1. The examiner should assess and record the extent of function in all these categories.


14.3 a Activities of Daily Living
Activities of daily living, as indicated in Table 1-2, include such activities as self-care, personal hygiene, communication, ambulation, travel, sexual function, and sleep. Any limitations in these activities of daily living should be related to the mental disorder rather than to such factors as lack of money or transporta- tion. In the context of the individual’s overall situa- tion, the quality of these activities is judged by their independence, appropriateness, effectiveness, and sustainability. It is necessary to define the extent to which the individual is capable of initiating and par- ticipating in these activities independent of supervi- sion or direction.

The examiner must assess not simply the number of activities that are restricted but the overall degree of restriction or combination of restrictions. For exam- ple, a person who is able to cook and clean might be considered to have marked restriction of daily activi- ties if he or she were too fearful to leave home to shop or go to the physician’s office.


14.3 b Social Functioning
Social functioning refers to an individual’s capacity to interact appropriately and communicate effec- tively with other individuals. Social functioning includes the ability to get along with others, such as family members, friends, neighbors, grocery clerks, landlords, or bus drivers. Impaired social functioning may be demonstrated by a history of altercations, evictions, firings, fear of strangers, avoidance of interpersonal relationships, social isolation, or simi- lar events or characteristics. It is helpful to give spe- cific examples illustrating the individual’s impaired social functioning.

Strength in social functioning may be documented by an individual’s ability to initiate social contact with others, communicate clearly with others, and interact and actively participate in group activities. Cooperative behavior, consideration for others, awareness of others’ sensitivities, and social maturity also need to be considered. Social functioning in work situations may involve interactions with the public, responding to persons in authority such as supervisors, or being part of a team.

The overall degree of interference with a particular aspect or combination of aspects is as significant as the number of aspects in which social functioning is impaired. For example, a hostile, uncooperative per- son who is tolerated by local storekeepers and neigh- bors may have marked restriction in overall functioning because antagonism and hostility are not acceptable in the workplace or in social contexts.


14.3c Concentration, Persistence, and Pace Concentration, persistence, and pace are needed to perform many activities of daily living, including task completion. Task completion refers to the ability to sustain focused attention long enough to permit the timely completion of tasks commonly found in activities of daily living or work settings. Deficiencies in concentration, persistence, and pace are best noted from previous work attempts or from observations in worklike settings, such as day-treatment centers and incentive work programs. Describing specific exam- ples of the individual’s capabilities is useful. Major impairments of these abilities can often be assessed through direct psychiatric examinations or psycho- logical testing. However, mental status examinations or psychological test data alone should not be considered adequate to fully describe the individual’s concentration and sustained ability to perform
work tasks.

Concentration and mental status may be assessed by having the individual perform such tasks as subtract- ing 7s serially from 100. In psychological tests of intelligence or memory, concentration is assessed through tasks requiring short-term memory or tasks that must be completed within established time lim- its. Strengths and weaknesses in mental concentra- tion may be described in terms of frequency of errors, the time it takes to complete the task, and the extent to which assistance is required to complete the task. A person who appears to concentrate ade- quately during a mental status examination or a psy- chological test may not do so in a setting more like one common to the working world.


14.3d Deterioration or Decompensation in Complex or Worklike Settings
Deterioration or decompensation in complex or worklike settings refers to an individual’s repeated failure to adapt to stressful circumstances. In the face of such circumstances, the individual may withdraw from the situation or experience exacerbation of signs and symptoms of a mental disorder; that is, he or she may decompensate and have difficulty main- taining performance of activities of daily living, con- tinuing social relationships, and completing tasks.
Stresses common to the work environment include attendance, making decisions, scheduling, complet- ing tasks, and interacting with supervisors and peers. It is useful to give examples of the individual’s decompensation and the stresses that might have brought it about.

In assessing the individual’s stress tolerance, the examiner should be mindful of the following issues. First, stress may be defined in reference to a “reason- able man” standard in some systems and to other standards in other systems. Second, the circum- stances of a given case might suggest a prophylactic preclusion from certain types of tasks or work set- tings. For example, a person with symptoms of post- traumatic stress disorder that date from a robbery and assault might require a prophylactic preclusion from jobs involving contact with the general public or handling large sums of money. In contrast, a stressful personality clash between the individual and his or her supervisor might require only that the indi- vidual be precluded from working with that particu- lar supervisor.


14.3e Classes of Impairment Due to Mental and Behavioral Disorders
Table 14-1 provides a guide for rating mental impair- ment in each of the four areas of functional limita- tion on a five-category scale that ranges from no impairment to extreme impairment. The following are recommended as anchors for the categories of the scale.

1. None means no impairment is noted in the function.
2. Mild implies that any discerned impairment is compatible with most useful functioning.
3. Moderate means that the identified impairments are compatible with some, but not all, useful functioning.
4. Marked is a level of impairment that significantly impedes useful functioning. Taken alone, a marked impairment would not completely pre- clude functioning, but together with marked limi- tation in another class, it might limit useful functioning.
5. Extreme means that the impairment or limitation is not compatible with useful function. Extreme

impairment in carrying out activities of daily liv- ing implies complete dependency on another per- son for care. In the sphere of social functioning, extreme impairment implies that the individual engages in no meaningful social contact, as with a person who is in a withdrawn, catatonic state. An extreme limitation in concentration, persistence, and pace means that the individual cannot attend to conversation or any productive task; this might be seen in a person who is in an acute confusional state or in a person with a complete loss of short- term memory.

A person who cannot tolerate any change at all in routines or in the environment, or one who cannot function and who decompensates when schedules change in an otherwise structured environment, has an extreme limitation of adaptive functioning and an extreme psychiatric impairment. Such an individual might, for example, experience a psychotic episode if a meal is not served on time or might have a panic attack if left without a companion in any situation.


In the ordinary individual, extreme impairment in only one area or marked limitation in two or more spheres would be likely to preclude the performance of any complex task, such as one involving recre- ation or work, without special support or assistance, such as that provided in a sheltered environment.

An individual impaired to a moderate degree in all four categories of functioning would be limited in the ability to carry out many, but not all, complex tasks. Mild and moderate limitations reduce overall performance but do not preclude some performance. Table 14-2 links specific impairments to potential associated disabilities.

Translating these guidelines for rating individual impairment on ordinal scales into a method for assign- ing percentage of impairments, as if valid estimates could be made on precisely measured interval scales, cannot be done reliably. One cannot be certain that the difference in impairment between a rating of mild and moderate is of the same magnitude as the difference between moderate and marked. Furthermore, a moder- ate impairment does not imply a 50% limitation in useful functioning, and an estimate of moderate impairment in all four categories does not imply a 50% impairment of the whole person.

Eventually, research may disclose direct relation- ships between medical findings and percentages of mental impairment. Until that time, the medical pro- fession must refine its concepts of mental and physi- cal impairment, improve its ability to measure limitations, and continue to make clinical judgments.

14.4 Assessing
Impairment
	Severity
The following factors, discussed below, must be con- sidered when assessing severity of an individual’s impairment: (1) the effects of treatment; (2) the effects of structured settings; (3) the variability of mental disorders; (4) an assessment of workplace function; and (5) the effects of common mental and behavioral conditions.


14.4a Effects of Treatment
Problems often arise in evaluating mental impairments of individuals who have long histories of repeated hospitalizations or prolonged outpatient care with supportive therapy and medication. Individuals with

chronic psychotic disorders commonly have their lives structured in such a way as to minimize stress and reduce their signs and symptoms. Such individuals may therefore be more impaired in terms of work capability than their signs and symptoms indicate. The results of a single examination may not adequately describe the ability of such a person to function in a sustained way. Thus, it is necessary to review informa- tion pertaining to the individual’s functioning at times of increased stress, such as in a worklike setting.


14.4b Effects of Structured Settings
In cases involving long-standing mental disorders, overt symptoms may be particularly controlled or attenuated by psychosocial factors, such as place- ment in a hospital, halfway house, board and care facility, or similar environment. These highly struc- tured and supportive settings may greatly reduce the mental demands placed on an individual. Although overt signs and symptoms of the underlying mental disorder may be minimized with lowered mental demands, the individual’s ability to function outside of the structured setting may not have changed. The evaluator of an individual whose symptoms are con- trolled in a structured setting must consider such fac- tors as the individual’s response to past attempts to function successfully at work or in other unstruc- tured environments.


14.4 c Variability of Mental Disorders
In judging the degree of mental impairment, it is important to recognize that there are various types of mental disorders, each of which, like a physical dis- order, has its own natural course and unique charac- teristics. In addition, degrees of impairment may vary considerably among individuals with the same diagnosis.

It is apparent that some serious mental disorders are chronic. The term remission, rather than cure, is therefore used to indicate an individual’s improve- ment. The remission may be intermittent, long term, or short term, and it may occur in stages rather than all at once. For example, an episode of depression that follows a stressful life event may turn out to be an adjustment disorder with depressed mood, which often is a short-term, self-limiting illness that clears up when the stressful situation is relieved. Other affective disorders have their own patterns of recur- rence and chronicity that often, but not always, respond well to therapeutic interventions. Thus, an individual with a medication-resistant major depres- sive episode may remain unable to sleep, eat, con- centrate, etc, for months or even years.


14.4d Assessment of Workplace Function Assessment of the ability to perform activities at work requires evaluation of similar abilities, along with unique skills, particular to the workplace. To assess the ability of an individual to function in the workplace, the evaluator may obtain additional infor- mation by using a multidimensional description of remaining work-related abilities. Four capacities, indicated below, have been used by SSA regulations to characterize residual functional capacity.

1. Understanding and memory relate to the individ- ual’s ability to remember procedures related to work; to understand and remember short, simple instructions; and to understand and remember detailed instructions.

2. Sustained concentration and persistence relate to the individual’s ability to carry out short, simple instructions; carry out detailed instructions; main- tain attention and concentration for extended peri- ods of time; perform activities within a given schedule; maintain regular attendance and be punctual within customary tolerances; sustain an ordinary routine without special supervision; work with or near others without being distracted; make simple work-related decisions; complete a normal workday and workweek without interruptions from psychologically based symptoms; and per- form at a consistent pace without an unreasonable number of and unreasonably long rest periods.

3. Social interaction involves the individual’s ability to interact appropriately with the general public; ask simple questions or request assistance; accept instructions and respond appropriately to criticism from supervisors; get along with coworkers and peers without distracting them or exhibiting behavioral extremes; maintain socially appropri- ate behavior; and adhere to basic standards of neatness and cleanliness.

4. Adaptation is the ability to respond appropriately to changes in the work setting; to be aware of nor- mal hazards and take appropriate precautions; to use public transportation and travel to and within unfamiliar places; to set realistic goals; and to make plans independently of others.

14.4e Effects of Common Mental and Behavioral Conditions
Some categories of mental and behavioral condi- tions, including substance-dependence disorders, personality disorders (especially antisocial personal- ity disorders), and adjustment disorders, are charac- terized by abnormal emotional responses to stressful life events, which resolve in a short time when the stressor is removed. The behavior during both con- trolled intervals and times of exacerbation should be noted.

The schizophrenias are usually chronic disorders; the onset may be insidious and recognized only in retrospect. Certain organic disorders, such as trau- matic brain injury and lifelong mental retardation, are persistent and chronic, and treatment consists of minimizing the functional loss inherent to the pathophysiologic changes. Evaluation of mental retardation and autism for social security considers the presence of mental incapacity evidenced by
(1) dependence on others for personal needs, such as toileting, eating, dressing, or bathing; and (2) an inability to follow directions, which precludes tests of intellectual functioning; or (3) a valid verbal per- formance or full-scale IQ of 59 or less, or a score of 60 through 69 along with physical or mental impair- ment affecting daily activities, social functioning, or concentration, persistence, and pace. Common psy- chiatric diagnoses, associated impairments in the
form of demonstrable signs and symptoms, and com- monly seen areas of decreased performance are dis- cussed below and in Table 14-2 .

14.4e.1 Substance Abuse and Personality Disorders
Chronic substance abuse and personality disorders can coincide. The effects of chronic substance abuse include impairments in concentration, attention, impulse control, judgment, etc, which often last for the duration of the dependency. These behaviors can also occur with personality disorders. To evaluate the severity of the impairment, the examiner needs to assess whether there are (1) restrictions in activities of daily living; (2) difficulties in maintaining social functioning; (3) difficulties in completing tasks in a timely manner because of deficiencies in concentra- tion, persistence, and pace; and (4) repeated episodes of decompensation and loss of adaptive functioning, averaging three times per year, with each episode lasting 2 or more weeks.


14.4e.2 Somatoform Pain Disorders
Pain that accompanies a medical impairment is gen- erally taken into account in the impairment ratings throughout the Guides. Chronic pain and pain exceeding the anticipated amount are discussed in Chapter 18. Mental illness may distort the perception of pain. Pain may be part of a somatic delusion in an individual with a major depression or a psychotic disorder. Pain may become the object of an obsessive preoccupation, or it may be the chief complaint in a conversion disorder. A frequent problem in pain assessment is the failure of physicians to agree on whether there is an adequate physical explanation for the pain. It would be useful for the examining psy- chiatrist to understand whether other professionals treating the individual feel that his or her symptoms are out of proportion with the physical findings. If they are, the psychiatrist should consider this finding in making a differential diagnosis and should recog- nize the possibility of the presence of somatoform or other mental disorders.

The essential feature of somatoform pain disorder in DSM-IV is preoccupation with pain in the absence of physical findings that adequately account for the pain and its intensity, as well as the presence of psy- chological factors that are judged to have a major role in the onset, severity, exacerbation, and mainte- nance of pain. In the past, this syndrome has been called psychogenic pain disorder or idiopathic pain disorder, but these terms are often used more loosely to describe any complaint of pain that is greater than the physician expects for the average person who has the same physical findings. The physician should recognize that anxiety and depression almost always magnify pain, and vice versa.

The following guidelines may be useful in determin- ing whether pain is a symptom of a mental impair- ment: (1) All possible somatic causes of the pain have been eliminated by careful, comprehensive medical examinations; (2) some significant emo- tional stressor has occurred in the individual’s life that may have acted as a triggering agent, and the stressor and the pain have occurred in a reasonable sequence; and (3) evidence exists of a mental disor- der other than a conversion-related one, and the pain may be a symptom of nonconversion-related mental disorders. For example, delusional pain may occur in an individual who has a subtle paranoid disorder such as might be the case with someone who believes Martians are irradiating his head, producing constant headaches, and where the belief antedated the pain.

14.4e.3 Malingering
Malingering may arise with mental disorders as well as with nonpsychiatric conditions. Examiners should be aware of this possibility when evaluating impair- ments. The possibility of obtaining monetary awards and avoiding work increases the likelihood of malin- gering. Certain symptoms, such as headache, low- back pain, peripheral neuralgia, and vertigo, are difficult to objectively assess. Conditions that have more of an apparent organic basis, such as appen- dicitis, a fracture, or pregnancy, tend to be more amenable to objective diagnostic studies than are some psychiatric and neurologic complaints.
Malingerers with supposed psychiatric conditions may be seen in circumstances involving the avoid- ance of an unpleasant duty or requirement, such as going to jail or entering military service, and may be seen seeking insurance or entitlement benefits.

Rather than giving outright fabrications, individuals may consciously or unconsciously exaggerate the symptoms of a disorder in the clinical or impairment evaluation setting. Malingering may be suspected when the individual’s symptoms are vague, ill defined, overdramatized, inconsistent, or not in con- formity with signs and symptoms known to occur. In this situation, results of the physical and mental sta- tus examinations and other data and information of the evaluation may be inconsistent with the nature and intensity of the person’s complaints.

Circumstances in which an unusual number of ill- defined complaints occur in a circumscribed group, perhaps in a setting of poor morale or conflict, also may be viewed with suspicion. But the most appro- priate approach for the examining physician is one of clinical neutrality, the application of standard inter- view and diagnostic procedures, and, if warning signs appear, a careful investigation that includes multidisciplinary evaluation and psychological test- ing as appropriate. For a more elaborate discussion of malingering, a text may be useful.7, 8


Table 14-2 Selected Impairments and Common Limitations in Ability


Impairment Schizophrenia


Schizophrenia or depression
Schizophrenia, depression, or anxiety disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder Borderline personality disorder Panic disorder with agoraphobia

Signs and Symptoms
Loosening of associations Delusions and hallucinations Flat affect
Inappropriate affect Bizarre behavior Disorganized behavior Social withdrawal; autism
Impaired concentration and attention

Decreased concentration Explosive outbursts Impulsivity
Affective lability Social withdrawal

Limitations in Ability
Social, vocational, and activities of daily living* Social, vocational, and activities of daily living Social
Social, vocational, and activities of daily living Social and vocational
Social, vocational, and activities of daily living Social and vocational
Social, vocational, and activities of daily living

Vocational
Social and vocational Social and vocational Social and vocational Social and vocational

* Activites of daily living are listed in Table 1-2.


14.5 Examples of
Impairment Due to Mental and Behavioral
	Disorders
The following cases indicate the information needed to accurately assess impairment and residual function.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 14-1
Impairment Due to Major Depressive Episode and Associated Anxiety

Subject: 47-year-old man.
History: Cardiologist; lives with his wife and two teenage children in the suburbs. Well until 4 months ago, when he developed acute chest pain due to a myocardial infarction (MI) involving the anterior descending coronary artery. He was in shock when sent to the cardiac ICU with a BP of 78/40 mm Hg. He underwent angioplasy and stent placement with good results, and was placed on Coumadin. He recovered without complications and was discharged to cardiac rehabilitation. On follow-up with his cardiologist, he appeared frightened, telling the cardiologist that this was the first time he’d been out of his home except for his rehab appointments and that he was afraid to travel alone. When the cardiologist informed him that he could safely return to work on a limited


basis and engage in all normal activities, includ- ing slowly resuming sexual intercourse with his wife, he seemed relieved. The remainder of the exam was normal, with his ECG charges consis- tent with an MI.
  The man was fearful of a recurrence and became anxious, returning home when attempting to go to work. His father and two paternal uncles had all died of heart disease in their 50s and 60s. He and his wife did not resume their sex life. He said he was afraid the “strain will kill me.” At the fourth follow-up visit at 6 months he reported no improvement in his anxiety; avoidance of work, sex, and playing with his children; and spending his time “trying to read and watch TV”; the cardi- ologist referred him to a psychiatrist.
Current Symptoms: His fears of dying young have immobilized him. He describes frequent awaken- ings with anxiety at night but cannot remember any dreams. He describes continual preoccupation with his somatic sensations, particularly of the chest. He feels hopeless and pessimistic all the time and, while not crying, feels sad and unable to enjoy anything.
Physical Exam: He has lost 9 kg (20 lb) since the hospitalization. On mental status evaluation, he appeared to be a thin, somewhat agitated man, both sad and anxious. He denied suicidal feelings but added, “I guess I feel I’ll die soon anyway.” He described feeling a “failure” because “I’m not earning for my family and I’m such a coward.”


His concentration was poor; he lost his train of thought when asked to do serial 7s and spell world backwards. He showed little insight, although there were no psychotic features.
Clinical Studies: No additional diagnostic tests were performed.
Diagnosis: Axis I: Depressive episode, major, with associated anxiety precipitated by MI but not sec- ondary to medical condition.
Axis II: Deferred.
Axis III: Status post-MI, healed. Surgical stent of anterior descending coronary artery. Normal cho- lesterol on Lipacor and Coumadin.
Axis IV: Stressors include his cardiac illness and early death of male relatives from heart disease. Axis V: GAF of 50.
Impairment Rating: At the time of the examination, the man was assessed a class 3 on social function, class 5 on concentration, class 1 on activities of daily living, and class 4 to 5 on adaptation.
Comment: An antidepressant once a day was begun, as was twice-weekly focal dynamic therapy with a time frame of 2 months. The man talked of his guilt about surviving all his male relatives (he had one older sister) and particularly his father, who had died when he was 14, leaving him “the stag in the house.” He resented his father’s dominant per- sonality and his father’s push for him to be a scholar/athlete just like he had been. His father was a general surgeon. He envied and resented his father and was ambivalent about his death. He experienced his own MI as punishment for his resentment of his father and for his own success. As the antidepressant took effect and therapy elu- cidated his anger at his father, the guilt, as well as his fear of punishment and anxiety, diminished.
He resumed working a few hours a day, eventu- ally returned to full practice, and resumed his sex- ual life as well. He stopped psychotherapy after 2 months but was to continue the antidepressant for 1 year to help prevent recurrence of the depression.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 14-2
Impairment Due to Borderline Personality Disorder

Subject: 32-year-old woman.
History: Twice-divorced woman, living alone in an apartment, and working as a legal secretary. She was briefly hospitalized after slashing her wrists in an apparent suicidal gesture several weeks prior to the evaluation.

Her illness began as a teenager, when she began using alcohol and recreational drugs, became promiscuous, and would become depressed in response to parental attempts to restrict her behav- ior or when she was rejected by a boyfriend or lover. During her teens, she was seen in the emer- gency room for overdoses and cutting herself— once superficially, once requiring stitches— following rejections by lovers. Her schoolwork, however, remained good. She graduated from high school and college with Bs and Cs despite continu- ation of the above-noted behaviors. During college she married twice, at age 19 for 3 months and at age 21 for 6 months. Each relationship was charac- terized by adoration of her lover, quickly followed by disappointment and denigration of their charac- ters and abilities as men. Each time she broke off the relationship, but the men were already alienated by her critical, clinging, and jealous behavior.
  Following college, she trained as a legal secre- tary. She has not held a job for more than 6 months in the 10 years she has been working. Each time she begins by idolizing her boss and the firm she works for and finds some male attorney she attempts to seduce or simply ingratiate herself with. When this fails, she becomes enraged, trucu- lent, depressed, and critical to the point where she is fired or leaves of her own accord.
  Her recent wrist slashing was precipitated by her having experienced two rejections within the same week. Her most recent job was terminated because of her seeming inability to tolerate rela- tionships with the male attorneys in her firm.
Also, her most recent lover (of only a month) decided to relocate to another city for a job oppor- tunity. She quickly grew depressed and developed some insomnia, anorexia, and feelings of “dead- ness,” worthlessness, and hopelessness. She cut both wrists and took 30 Tylenol and 20 fluoxetine tablets.
  After having her wrist lacerations stitched and gastric lavage in the ER, she was transferred to the psychiatric unit of the hospital. On the unit, she quickly reconstituted a good mood, became active, flirted with patients and staff, and devel- oped a crush on her physician while reviling the other staff. She was discharged after 5 days and had one appointment with a private psychiatrist, who began her on weekly psychotherapy and pre- scribed an antidepressant twice a day.
Current Symptoms: The woman describes current feelings of some regret at her suicidal behavior. She does, however, still feel dead, numb, and bored, all of which she says she always experi- ences when she is uninvolved with a man sexually,


at work in a mentoring relationship, or both. She admits to using occasional cocaine by snorting, as well as alcohol to “feel better or feel something,” and to occasional superficial cutting of her skin to achieve the same end. She states that she has been advised by her therapists to avoid a relationship or a job at least until the therapy and medication have helped her with her quick tendency to depressed and suicidal feelings and her now obvious pattern of losing jobs due to her uncontrollable anger.
Physical Exam: On examination, she is a well- groomed, well-dressed, attractive young woman who is cooperative and dramatically gives her his- tory, which corroborates that obtained from the hospital records. She has bandages on both wrists, which she fails to cover with her short-sleeved blouse. Her speech is logical and coherent, as well as goal directed. There is no evidence of delu- sions, hallucinations, or suspiciousness. As she talks of former bosses or lovers, however, they are uniformly and angrily described in demonizing, denigrating, and debasing terms. Her sensorium is clear, and her ability to abstract is intact. Physical examination is within normal limits except for the wrists.
Clinical Studies: Psychological testing, including IQ and projective, done on the inpatient service demonstrated an overall IQ of 123 and a “border- line personality structure” with “tendencies to affective instability, splitting (idealizing or deni- grating significant others), and impulsivity,” as well as “dissociative states and defensive numb- ness of affect to deal with her rage and depend- ency.”
Diagnosis: Axis I: Rule out depressive disorder not otherwise specified; cocaine and alcohol use.
Axis II: Borderline personality disorder.
Axis III: Status postsurgical suture of cuts to both wrists.
Axis IV: Rejection by job and boyfriend. Axis V: GAF of 50 to 60.
Impairment Rating: This woman would be rated as having no impairment noted on activities of daily living in Table 14-1. However, her social function- ing is class 3, as is her concentration, and her adaptation would be considered class 5.
Comment: The class 5 adaptation rating is based on the woman’s inability to hold a job for longer than a few months due to her affective dyscontrol and impulsivity, as well as her inability to sustain any long-term relationships.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 14-3
Impairment Due to Personality Disorder


Subject: 28-year-old man.
History: Lives with his parents in the family home; unemployed since his parents sold the family business 4 years ago. He describes himself—and school records and school psychological testing concur—as a fearful and isolated child. Based on school and home records, when he was 4 and was to begin nursery school, he refused to allow his mother to leave him, growing intensely frightened as she was about to leave him with the teacher and classmates. He was tremulous, crying, and clung to his mother’s coat. This lasted for several months; he later would allow her to leave but would cling to the teacher and refuse to play with other children. This pattern continued until he graduated from high school. He developed fear of the dark and required a light to be on in order to go to sleep. He also refused to go to other chil- dren’s houses to play and made few, if any, friends.
  In adolescence, his peers would occasionally tease him, but “mainly they left me alone, which was okay with me.” Upon graduation from high school, he refused to go to college despite having earned As and Bs in school. He was taken on in the family’s small grocery store as a clerk and delivery boy. He avoided conversations with cus- tomers, who would occasionally comment to his parents on his normal appearance but behavioral “strangeness.” He refused other employment by family members and friends. He spends his time reading or watching TV.
Current Symptoms: The man shops for his mother, engages in household chores, answers the phone, dresses himself appropriately, and accompanies his parents to family gatherings and outings. He will go to the movies by himself. He has refused multiple attempts to take him for counseling and/or psychiatric treatment, saying “nothing is wrong with me except my parents want me to work and have friends. Well, maybe I should and even want to, but you can’t help me.” He states that he is interested in women and masturbates regularly. He has never been on a date, fearing rejection and not knowing “what would I do or talk about.”


Physical Exam: A well-dressed, well-groomed young man who appears his stated age. Though superficially pleasant, he is monosyllabic and resistant to any spontaneous conversation.
Although his isolation from social relationships “is voluntary, I don’t need people except my fam- ily,” he does admit to wishing he had a “girl- friend” and a “job to keep me busy and get my family off my back.” His speech and thoughts are logical and goal directed, without evidence of delusions, although he does report, “I feel like people think I’m strange and talk about me when I’m in a group, but maybe that’s true or I just imagine it. I don’t really hear them talking, but I worry about it.” He denies hallucinations, obses- sions, compulsions, or any episodes of severe depression or mania. He does feel anxiety in social situations, accompanied by sweating and palpitations and a wish “to scram out of there,” but denies symptoms of panic attacks or specific phobias. His sensorium is clear in regard to orien- tation and both short-term and long-term memory, and his ability to abstract is intact. He has some insight but no motivation for treatment, which he describes as “another relationship I don’t want.” Examination is otherwise normal.
Clinical Studies: Psychological testing was done— IQ, projective, and MMPI—at age 11 and again 2 years ago. They revealed an intelligence in the low normal range (105) and “pronounced tendencies toward avoidant, anxious, phobic traits in the absence of any psychotic features” and concluded he was suffering from “severe avoidant, schizoid, and dependent personality traits” with a past his- tory of “school phobia.”
Diagnosis: Axis I: None.
Axis II: Personality disorder, mixed, with avoidant, dependent, and schizoid features. Axis III: None.
Axis IV: Separation from family. Axis V: GAF of 50 to 60.
Impairment Rating: Using Table 14-1, this person would be rated as class 1 on activities of daily liv- ing, class 4 on social functioning, class 1 or possi- bly 2 on concentration, and class 5 on adaptation.
14.6
Format of the
	Impairment Report
The following general format for impairment reports has been adapted from that recommended by the Social Security Administration.4 The content of the report may vary, depending on the system for which the report is being prepared. An impairment report based on the Guides also should include the main features of the Report of Medical Evaluation form shown in Chapter 2.

A. Introduction: The psychiatric or psychological examination report should show not only the indi- vidual’s signs, symptoms, laboratory findings (psychological test results), and diagnosis but also the effect of the emotional or mental disorder on his or her ability to function at the usual and cus- tomary level of personal, social, and occupational adjustment.
1. Specialty: The exam should be performed by a psychiatrist.
2. General Observations: Include in the report general observations of the following:
a. How the individual came to the examina- tion.
(1) Alone or accompanied.
(2) Distance and mode of transportation.
(3) If by automobile, who drove?
b. General appearance:
(1) Dress.
(2) Grooming.
(3) Appearance of invalidism.
c. Attitude and degree of cooperation.
d. Posture and gait.
e. Involuntary movements.
3. Informant: The psychiatrist should identify the person providing the history (usually the examinee) and should provide an estimate of the reliability of the history.
4. Chief Complaint: This should include a detailed chronological account of the onset and progression of the current mental/emotional condition with special reference to the individ- ual’s concerns.
a. Date and circumstances of onset of the con- dition.
b. Date the individual reported that the condi- tion began to interfere with work, and how it interfered.
c. Date the individual reported inability to work because of the condition and the cir- cumstances.
d. Attempts to return to work and the results.


e. Outpatient evaluations and treatment for mental/emotional problems, including:
(1) Name of treating sources.
(2) Dates of treatment.
(3) Type of treatment (name and dosage of medications, if prescribed).
(4) Response to treatment.
f. Hospitalizations for mental disorders, including:
(1) Names of hospitals.
(2) Dates of hospitalizations.
(3) Treatment and response.
g. Information concerning the individual’s:
(1) Activities of daily living.
(2) Social functioning.
(3) Ability to complete tasks timely and appropriately.
(4) Episodes of decompensation and their resulting effects.
5. Past History: This should include a longitudi- nal account of the individual’s personal life, including:
a. Relevant educational, medical, social, legal, military, marital, and occupational data and any associated problems in adjustment.
b. Details (dates, places, etc) of any past his- tory of outpatient treatment and hospitaliza- tions for mental/emotional problems.
c. History, if any, of substance abuse and/or treatment in detoxification and rehabilita- tion centers.
6. Mental Status: The individual case facts will determine the specific areas of mental status that need to be emphasized during the exami- nation, but generally the report should include a detailed description of the individual’s:
a. Appearance, behavior, and speech (if not already described).
b. Thought process (eg, loosening of associa- tion).
c. Thought content (eg, delusion).
d. Perceptual abnormalities (eg, hallucinations).
e. Mood and affect (eg, depression, mania).
f. Sensorium and cognition (eg, orientation, recall, memory, concentration, scope of information, and intelligence).
g. Judgment and insight.
7. Diagnosis: American Psychiatric Association standard nomenclature as set forth in the cur- rent Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.
8. Prognosis: Prognosis and recommendations for treatment, if indicated; also recommenda- tions for any other medical evaluation (eg, neu- rologic, general physical) if indicated.
B.
Policy—Additional Requirements by Impairment
1. Schizophrenic, Delusional (Paranoid) Schizo-affective, and Other Psychotic Disorders: The report should reflect:
a. Periods of residence in structured settings such as halfway houses and group homes.
b. Frequency and duration of episodes of ill- ness and periods of remission.
c. Side effects of medications.
2. Organic Mental Disorders: The report should reflect:
a. The source of the disorder, if known, the prognosis, and:
(1) Whether there is an acute or chronic process.
(2) Whether stable or progressive.
(3) Changes at various points in time.
b. The results of any psychological or neu- ropsychological testing that could serve to further document an organic process and its severity.
c. Information regarding the results of any neurologic evaluations.
d. Information about any neurologic testing (eg, EEG, CT scan) that may have been per- formed and the results, if available.
3. Mental Retardation
a. Current documentation of IQ by a standard- ized, well-recognized measure. Acceptable instruments will have a representative nor- mative sample, a mean of approximately 100, and a standard deviation of approxi- mately 15 in the general population, and will cover a broad range of cognitive and perceptual-motor functions (eg, the Wechsler scales).
b. Verbal performance and full-scale IQ scores, together with the individual subtest scores.
c. Interpretation of the scores and assessment of the validity of the obtained scores, indi- cating any factors that may have influenced the results, such as the individual’s attitude and degree of cooperation; the presence of visual, hearing, or other physical problems; and recent prior exposure to the same or a similar test.
d. Consistency of the obtained test results with the individual’s education, vocational back- ground, and social adjustment, especially in the area of personal self-sufficiency.






================================================================================
Chapter 15: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Spine
15.1 Principles of Assessment
15.2 Determining the Appropriate Method for Assessment
15.3 Diagnosis-Related Estimates Method
15.4 DRE: Lumbar Spine
15.5 DRE: Thoracic Spine
15.6 DRE: Cervical Spine
15.7 Rating Corticospinal Tract Damage
15.8 Range-of-Motion Method
15.9 ROM: Lumbar Spine
15.10 ROM: Thoracic Spine
15.11 ROM: Cervical Spine
15.12 Nerve Root and/or Spinal Cord
15.13 Criteria for Converting Whole Person Impairment to Regional Spine Impairment
15.14 The Pelvis
15.15 Spine Evaluation Summary
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating perma- nent impairments of the spine, including how they affect an individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living (ADL). The spine consists of four regions: the cervical, thoracic, lumbar and sacral vertebrae, and associated soft tissues including muscles, ligaments, disks, and neural elements. Impairments of the spine discussed in this chapter include lumbar, thoracic, cer- vical, spinal cord, and pelvic impairments.

The following revisions have been made for the fifth edition: (1) The use of the diagnosis-related estimate (DRE) and range-of-motion (ROM) methods has been modified, and applications are described in greater detail; (2) impairment is rated only when the individual has reached maximal medical improve- ment (MMI); (3) impairments within a DRE category encompass a range, with adjustments of up to 3%;
(4) spinal cord injury is evaluated according to the functional approach in the nervous system chapter;
(5) the “differentiators” in the fourth edition have been replaced by “objective findings” and are more specifically defined; and (6) alterations of motion segment integrity have been redefined to reflect cur- rent scientific knowledge.


373


As in the fourth edition,1 the DRE method is the pri- mary method used to evaluate individuals with an injury. Use the ROM method when the impairment is not caused by an injury or when an individual’s con- dition is not well represented by a DRE category. The ROM method is also now used to evaluate individuals with an injury at more than one level in the same spinal region and in certain individuals with recur- rent pathology. This approach addresses the difficulty of assigning these individuals to an appropriate DRE category. An exception, however, is individuals with corticospinal involvement who have been treated with decompression and multilevel fusions within the same region; they should be rated by the DRE method because assessing ROM in paralyzed individ- uals is difficult. Finally, the range-of-motion method should be used if statutorily mandated in a particular jurisdiction. A more detailed description of the appli- cations of either method is provided in Section 15.2.

As stated in this edition, an individual with a spinal condition is rated only when the condition is stable (unlikely to change within the next year regardless of treatment), ie, when MMI has been reached (Chapter 1 and Glossary). The individual is evaluated based on medical findings that are present when MMI has been reached.


15.1 Principles of
	Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss
the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

The evaluation should include a comprehensive, accurate medical history; a review of all pertinent records; a comprehensive description of the individ- ual’s current symptoms and their relationship to daily activities; a careful and thorough physical examina- tion; and all findings of relevant laboratory, radio- logic (imaging), electrodiagnostic, and ancillary tests. It is also essential that the rater include in the report a description of how the impairment was cal- culated. Because many ratings are reviewed by other physicians and nonmedical personnel, the explana- tion of the calculation will lead to a better under- standing of the method used and the report will be considered more reliable and complete.
15.1
a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
History
The history should be based primarily on the individ- ual’s own statements rather than secondhand informa- tion. While the medical history should consider information from others, the physician should be cau- tious about using subjective information from med- ical records. It is not appropriate to question the individual’s integrity. If information from the individ- ual is inconsistent with what is known about the med- ical condition, circumstances, or written records, the physician should report and comment on the incon- sistencies.

The history must describe in detail the chief com- plaint and the quality, severity, anatomic location, frequency, and duration of symptoms, including pain, numbness, paresthesias, and weakness.
Document exacerbating and alleviating factors and the way in which the condition interferes with daily activities. The physician should elicit the history of when and how the condition started, any precipitat- ing events or factors, and the relationship to any pre- vious spine problems.2-4

The history should include the individual’s descrip- tion, in his or her own words, of how the symptoms developed and the assumed cause. In addition, the response to treatment and the results of special stud- ies that have been performed should be described.
The physician should either review available roentgenograms and other imaging studies person- ally or report the findings as being those of another reviewer (based on reports). A review of organ sys- tems and of the general medical history can provide potentially helpful information, including complicat- ing medical problems that can affect the diagnosis, treatment plan, prognosis, disability, etc.


Examination
Physical examination of nonmusculoskeletal areas (eg, nervous system) is discussed in other parts of the Guides. Since a targeted neurologic assessment is needed for individuals with back or neck problems, the physician must have a good grasp of basic neuro- logic examination techniques and principles. Guided by the history, the physician should focus on
spine-related physical findings, such as range of motion, reflexes, muscle strength and atrophy, sen- sory deficits, root tension signs, gait, and the need for assistive devices (Table 15-1). Range-of-motion measurements are discussed later in this chapter.


The physical examination of the spine must be placed in the context of the individual’s general health and condition. For findings such as atrophy, consider other possible explanations besides spine impairment, such as previous joint surgery or hyper- trophy of the contralateral side from overuse. Other physical conditions may be present that influence motor and sensory function, ranges of motion, and sciatic nerve tension. Examination of associated sys- tems (vascular, nervous) and follow-up of any possi- bly significant information from the history and physical examination will allow the physician to dis- tinguish between spine-related findings and other abnormalities.2-4

The physician should record and discuss any physi- cal findings that are inconsistent with the history.
Many physical findings are subjective, ie, potentially under the influence of the individual. It is important to appreciate this and not confuse such observations with truly objective findings.

It is not the purpose of this text to discuss in detail how the physical examination is performed; text- books are available to cover that subject. A few aspects of particular value to the impairment evalua- tion will be discussed subsequently.


Thoracic Spine


Cervical Spine

Evaluation of Sciatic Nerve Tension Signs Sciatic nerve tension signs are important indicators of irritation of the lumbosacral nerve roots. While most commonly seen in individuals with a herniated lumbar disk, this is not always the case. In chronic nerve root compression due to spinal stenosis, ten- sion signs are often absent. A variety of nerve ten- sion signs have been described. The most commonly used is the straight leg raising test (SLR). When per- formed in the supine position, the hip is flexed with the knee extended. In the sitting position, with the hip flexed 90°, the knee is extended. The test is posi- tive when thigh and/or leg pain along the appropriate dermatomal distribution is reproduced. The degree of elevation at which pain occurs is recorded.

Research indicates that the maximum movement of nerve roots occurs when the leg is at an angle of 20° to 70° relative to the trunk. However, this may vary depending on the individual’s anatomy. Further, the L4, L5, and S1 nerve roots are those that primarily change their length when straight leg raising is per- formed. Thus, pathology at higher levels of the lum- bar spine is often associated with a negative SLR. Root tension signs are most reliable when the pain is elicited in a dermatomal distribution. Back pain on


SLR is not a positive test. Hamstring tightness must also be differentiated from posterior thigh pain due to root tension.

With time, spine-related symptoms usually improve, and a positive root tension (SLR) test is elicited only at the extremes of hip flexion (leg raising). While straight leg raising in disk herniation is a relatively sensitive test (72% to 97%), it is nonspecific (11% to 45%).5 Straight leg raising of the asymptomatic limb (eg, crossed SLR) that produces sciatica in the limb with symptoms (crossed positive) is a specific (85% to 100%) but less sensitive (23% to 42%) test.

Results of supine SLR can be further validated by recording the individual’s response to gentle dorsi- flexion and plantar flexion of the ankle, and to inter- nal and external rotation of the hip when the straightened leg is raised to the point where symp- toms begin. Normally, ankle dorsiflexion and hip internal rotation increase the pain, and ankle plantar flexion and hip external rotation decrease the sciat- ica. Since sitting knee extension and supine hip flex- ion culminate in essentially identical positions, symptomatic responses to the two types of SLR should be similar, although the angle at which pain is elicited may vary.

The reverse SLR or femoral stretch test causes root tension of L2, L3, and L4 and may be a sign of disk herniations at the higher levels. This test has low sen- sitivity and specificity.
Neurologic Tests
Neurologic examination of the lower extremity should include measurement of knee and ankle reflexes and motor and sensory functions. Because over 90% of all nerve-related pathology in the lum- bar spine occurs at the L3-4, L4-5, and L5-S1 levels, it is especially important to recognize the functions of the L4, L5, and S1 nerves (Table 15-2). The knee reflex is primarily a test of L4 nerve root function. Individuals with pathology at the L3-4 level may also have sensory changes in the L4 dermatome (Figure 15-1) and quadriceps weakness. L5 nerve root com- pression will often influence the strength of the extensor hallucis longus muscle, but other foot and ankle muscles can be affected as well, resulting in weakness in foot dorsiflexion and difficulty walking on the heels. The ankle reflex is primarily mediated by the S1 nerve root. Weakness in foot plantar flex- ion and difficulty with toe walking can also occur with S1 root compression. The Babinski sign and
the presence of clonus and hyperreflexia are impor- tant indicators of corticospinal tract involvement.


Changes in balance and gait pattern may also signify myelopathy.

A systematic neurologic examination can also local- ize the affected cervical nerve root (Table 15-2). The upper spine and extremity sensory dermatomes appear in Figure 15-2. The biceps (C5, partially C6), brachioradialis (C6), and triceps (C7) reflexes should
L4	be elicited. Weakness of the deltoid and biceps mus- cles implicates C5; wrist extensors C6; triceps, wrist flexors, and finger extensors C7; finger flexors C8; and intrinsics C8 and T1. Sensation can be grossly evaluated by touch and more precisely determined by pinprick, light touch, and a vibrating fork.
Dermatomal overlap is common.

Reflexes should always be compared between extremities and elicited several times to determine reproducibility. Importantly, reflexes once “lost” due to previous injury or disease rarely return. Strength should also be compared between extremities and may need repeat testing to determine effort and reproducibility.


15.1 b Description of Clinical Studies
General
The individual may have undergone a variety of special tests including electromyographic, cystomet- ric, roentgenographic studies with or without dye, CT scans, and MRI studies with or without contrast. The physician should determine when, where, and by whom the studies were done, the findings, and who interpreted them. Whenever possible, the physician should personally review the studies and report agreement or disagreement with previous interpreta- tions. A summary of the studies should be included as a separate paragraph or section.

While imaging and other studies may assist physi- cians in making a diagnosis, it is important to note that a positive imaging study in and of itself does not make the diagnosis. Several reports indicate approxi- mately 30% of persons who have never had back pain will have an imaging study that can be inter- preted as positive for a herniated disk, and 50% or more will have bulging disks. Further, the prevalence of degeneration changes, bulges, and herniations increases with advancing age.6-11 To be of diagnostic value, clinical symptoms and signs must agree with the imaging findings. In other words, an imaging test is useful to confirm a diagnosis, but an imaging result alone is insufficient to qualify for a DRE cate- gory. Individuals with electromyography (EMG) studies that are clearly positive support a diagnosis of radiculopathy and therefore qualify for at least DRE category III.14


Motion Segment Integrity
A motion segment of the spine is defined as two adjacent vertebrae, the intervertebral disk, the apophyseal or facet joints, and ligamentous struc- tures between the vertebrae. The range of motion from segment to segment varies. In the upper cervi- cal spine (occiput to C2), there is little flexion- extension, while the lower cervical spine permits increasing flexion-extension movements from about 10° at C2 to C3 to about 20° at C5 to C6 and C6 to C7. Flexion-extension movements are about 4° in the upper thoracic spine, 6° in the midthoracic spine, and 12° in the lower thoracic spine segments. In the lum- bar spine there is a gradual increase from about 12° at L1 to L2 to 20° at the L5 to S1 level.13

Lateral bending is 5° to 6° in the lower cervical spine and about 6° in the upper thoracic spine.
In the lumbar spine, lateral bending is greatest at L3 to L4, where it is about 8° to 9°. Axial rotation is 30° to 40° in each direction in the upper cervical spine, 5° to 6° in the lower cervical and upper thoracic spine, and minimal in the lumbar spine.

Throughout the spine, movements are coupled; this means that the primary motion in one direction always is accompanied by a secondary motion in another direction. For example, rotation is almost always combined with side bending. The dominant motions at both the lower cervical and entire lumbar spine, where most clinical pathology occurs, are flexion-extension.

Alteration of motion segment integrity can be either loss of motion segment integrity (increased transla- tional or angular motion) or decreased motion result- ing mainly from developmental changes, fusion, fracture healing, healed infection, or surgical arthrodesis. An attempt at arthrodesis may not neces- sarily result in a solid fusion, but it may significantly limit motion at a motion segment and qualify for alteration of motion segment integrity.


A line is drawn along the posterior bodies of the vertebrae below and above the motion segment in question on dynamic (flexion and extension), lateral roentgenograms of the spine. The distance between lines A and B and the distance between lines B and C at the level of the posteroinferior corner of the upper vertebral body are summed. A value greater than 2.5 mm in the thoracic spine, greater than 4.5 mm in the lumbar spine, and greater than 3.5 mm in the cervical spine qualifies as loss of structural integrity.


Motion of the individual spine segments cannot be determined by a physical examination but is evalu- ated with flexion and extension roentgenograms (see Figures 15-3a through 15-3c).13,14 Loss of motion seg- ment integrity is defined as an anteroposterior motion of one vertebra over another that is greater than 3.5 mm in the cervical spine, greater than
2.5 mm in the thoracic spine, and greater than 4.5 mm in the lumbar spine (Figure 15-3a). Loss of motion segment integrity is also defined as a differ- ence in the angular motion of two adjacent motion segments greater than 15° at L1-2, L2-3, and L3-4 and greater than 20° at L4 to L5. Loss of integrity of the lumbosacral joint is defined as angular motion between L5 and S1 that is greater than 25°. In the cervical spine, loss of motion segment integrity is defined as motion at the level in question that is more than 11° greater than at either adjacent level.

When routine x-rays are normal and severe trauma is absent, motion segment alteration is rare; thus, flex- ion and extension x-rays are indicated only when the physician suspects motion segment alteration from history or findings on routine x-rays.14
15.2
Determining the Appropriate Method
	for Assessment
Spinal impairment rating is performed using one of two methods: the diagnosis-related estimate (DRE) or range-of-motion (ROM) method.

The DRE method is the principal methodology used to evaluate an individual who has had a distinct injury.When the cause of the impairment is not easily determined and if the impairment can be well char- acterized by the DRE method, the evaluator should use the DRE method.

The ROM method is used in several situations:
1. When an impairment is not caused by an injury, if the cause of the condition is uncertain and the DRE method does not apply, or an individual cannot be easily categorized in a DRE class. It is acknowl- edged that the cause of impairment (injury, illness, or aging) cannot always be determined. The reason for using the ROM method under these circum- stances must be carefully supported in writing.


Lines are drawn along the superior border of the vertebral body of the lower vertebrae and the superior border of the body of the upper vertebrae and the lines extended until they join. The angles are measured and subtracted. Note that lordosis (extension) is represented by a negative angle and kyphosis (flexion) by a posi- tive angle. Loss of motion segment integrity is defined as motion greater than 15° at L1-2, L2-3, and L3-4 and greater than 20°
at L4 to L5. Loss of integrity of the lumbosacral joint is defined as angular motion between L5 and S1 that is greater than 25°. The flexion angle is +8° and the extension angle is –18°. Therefore (+8) – (–18) = +26° and would qualify for loss of structural integrity at any lumbar level.


Lines are drawn along the inferior borders of the two vertebral bodies adjacent to the level in question and of the vertebral bod- ies above and below those two vertebrae. Angles A, B, and C are measured on both flexion and extension x-rays and the measure- ments subtracted from one another. Note that lordosis (extension) is represented by a negative angle and kyphosis (flexion) is repre- sented by a positive angle. Loss of motion segment integrity is defined as motion at the level in question that is more than 11° greater than at either adjacent level.


2. When there is multilevel involvement in the same spinal region (eg, fractures at multiple levels, disk herniations, or stenosis with radiculopathy at mul- tiple levels or bilaterally).
3. Where there is alteration of motion segment integrity (eg, fusions) at multiple levels in the same spinal region, unless there is involvement of the corticospinal tract (then use the DRE method for corticospinal tract involvement).
4. Where there is recurrent radiculopathy caused by a new (recurrent) disk herniation or a recurrent injury in the same spinal region.
5. Where there are multiple episodes of other pathol- ogy producing alteration of motion segment integrity and/or radiculopathy.

The ROM method can also be used if statutorily mandated in a particular jurisdiction.

In the small number of instances in which the ROM and DRE methods can both be used, evaluate the individual with both methods and award the higher rating.

All spine impairment ratings shown in Tables 15-3 to 15-5 estimate whole person impairment. With both the DRE method and the ROM method, whole per- son function is regarded as 100%. For converting whole person to regional spine impairments, see Section 15.13. When two or more regions are impaired and rated by either the DRE or ROM method, the ratings should be combined using the Combined Values Chart, p. 604.

A flowchart of the spine impairment evaluation process is provided in Figure 15-4.


Yes


No


Yes


No


15.2 a Summary of Specific Procedures and Directions
1. Take a careful history, perform a thorough med- ical examination, and review all pertinent records and studies. This is helpful in determin- ing the presence or absence of structural abnor- malities, nerve root or cord involvement, and motion segment integrity.
2. Consider the permanency of the impairment, referring to Guides Chapter 1 and the Glossary for definitions as needed. If the impairment is resolving, changing, unstable, or expected to change significantly with or without medical treatment within 12 months, it is not considered a permanent (stable) impairment and should not be rated under the Guides criteria.
3.
Select the region that is primarily involved (ie, the lumbar, cervical, or thoracic spine) and identify the individual’s most serious objective findings.
4. Determine whether the individual has multilevel involvement or multiple recurrences/occasions within the same region of the spine. Use the ROM method if:
a. there are fractures at more than one level in a spinal region,
b. there is radiculopathy bilaterally or at multi- ple levels in the same spinal region,
c. there is multilevel motion segment alteration (such as a multilevel fusion) in the same spinal region, or
d. there is recurrent disk herniation or stenosis with radiculopathy at the same or a different level in the same spinal region; in this case, combine the ratings using the ROM method.


5. If the individual does not have multilevel involvement or multiple recurrences/occasions and an injury occurred, determine the proper DRE category. Most ratings will fall into cate- gories I, II, or III. A corticospinal tract injury is evaluated according to Section 15.7.
6. If the individual has been treated with surgery or another modality, evaluate the results, extent of improvement, and impact on the ability to per- form activities of daily living. If residual symp- toms or objective findings impact the ability to perform ADL despite treatment, the higher per- centage in each range should be assigned. If an individual had a prior condition, was asympto- matic, and now—at MMI—has symptoms that impact the ability to perform activities of daily living, the higher rating within a range may also be used. If ratings are increased, explicit docu- mentation of the reasons for the increase should be included in the report.
7. If more than one spine region is impaired, deter- mine the impairment of the other region(s) with the DRE method. Combine the regional impair- ments using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to express the individual’s total spine impairment.
8. From historical information and previously com- piled medical data, determine if there was a pre- existing impairment. Congenital, developmental, and other preexisting conditions may be differ- entiated from those attributable to the injury or illness by examining preinjury roentgenograms or by performing a bone scan after the onset of the condition.
9.
If requested, apportion findings to the current or prior condition, following jurisdiction practices and assuming adequate information is available on the prior condition. In some instances, to apportion ratings, the percent impairment due to previous findings can simply be subtracted from the percent based on the current findings. Ideally, use the same method to compare the individual’s prior and present conditions. If the ROM method has been used previously, it must be used again. If the previous evaluation was based on the DRE method and the individual now is evaluated with the ROM method, and prior ROM measurements do not exist to calcu- late a ROM impairment rating, the previous DRE percent can be subtracted from the ROM ratings. Because there are two methods and complete data may not exist on an earlier assess- ment, the apportionment calculation may be a less than ideal estimate.
10. For individuals with corticospinal tract involve- ment, refer to Table 15-6 for the appropriate impairment rating.


15.3 Diagnosis-Related
	Estimates Method

The DRE method has eight diagnosis-related cate- gories for each of the three spinal regions. In assign- ing the individual to the correct DRE category, one of two approaches is used. The first is based on symptoms, signs, and appropriate diagnostic test results. The second is based on the presence of frac- tures and/or dislocations with or without clinical symptoms. If a fracture is present that places the individual into a DRE category, no other verification is required. The symptoms, signs other than frac- tures, and tests used to assist correct categorization of an individual are defined in Box 15-1.


To use the DRE method, obtain an individual’s his- tory, examine the individual, review the results of appropriate diagnostic studies, and place the individ- ual in the appropriate category. Although there are eight categories, almost all individuals will fall into one of the first three DRE categories. Altered motion segment integrity (ie, increased motion or loss of motion) qualifies the individual for category IV or V. A fracture and/or dislocation, with or without clinical symptoms, permits placement of the individual into a DRE category with no additional verification. If there are impairments in different spinal regions, rate each spinal region separately using the DRE method; then combine the ratings using the Combined Values Chart on page 604. As stated previously, fractures at more than one level in the same spinal region should be rated using the ROM method.

In most cases, using the definitions provided in Box 15-1, the physician can assign an individual to DRE category I, II, or III. An individual in category I has only subjective findings. In category II, the individ- ual has objective findings but no radiculopathy or alteration of structural integrity, while in category III, radiculopathy with objective verification must be present. Since an individual is evaluated after having reached MMI, a previous history of objective find- ings may not define the current, ratable condition but is important in determining the course and whether

MMI has been reached. The impairment rating is based on the condition once MMI is reached, not on prior symptoms or signs.

If the individual had a radiculopathy caused by a her- niated disk or lateral spinal stenosis that responded to conservative treatment and currently has no radicular symptoms or signs, he or she is placed in category II, since at MMI there is no radiculopathy. Category III is for individuals with a symptomatic radiculopathy, either after medical or surgical treatment, or for indi- viduals who have a history of previous radiculopathy caused by disk herniation or lateral spinal stenosis but have improved or become asymptomatic following surgery.

The DRE method recommends that physicians docu- ment physiologic and structural impairments relating to injuries or diseases other than common develop- mental findings, such as (1) spondylolysis, found normally in 7% of adults; (2) spondylolisthesis, found in 3% of adults; (3) herniated disk without radiculopathy, found in approximately 30% of indi- viduals by age 40 years; and (4) aging changes, pres- ent in 40% of adults after age 35 years and in almost all individuals after age 50.6,12 As previously noted, the presence of these abnormalities on imaging stud- ies does not necessarily mean the individual has an impairment due to an injury.


In cases where the abnormalities discussed above are present on imaging studies and are known or assumed to have preexisted an injury being rated, physicians should acknowledge these antecedent conditions. If requested, physicians may need to assess whether the condition was previously symptomatic and whether any aggravation occurred as a result of the injury.
Physicians should be aware of the statutory definition in the involved jurisdiction pertaining to aggravation to ensure their use of the term is consistent with their state’s legal interpretation.

DRE categories are discussed in the following three sections.
15.4
 DRE: Lumbar Spine
The lumbar spine DRE categories are summarized in Table 15-3. Apart from category I, each category includes a range to account for the resolution or con- tinuation of symptoms and their impact on the ability to perform ADL.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-1
0% Impairment Due to Lumbar Injury

Subject: 24-year-old man.
History: Hurt his back while lifting a large, heavy box; described the pain as being in the lum- bosacral region. Examination shortly after the injury was normal, except for a slight decrease in lumbar motion due to pain. No muscle spasm or weakness. The individual was treated with an analgesic. He was off work for 3 days and then returned and has continued to work.
Current Symptoms: Occasional soreness in the low back with heavy lifting; denies leg pain or numb- ness.
Physical Exam: No positive finding was present, including a negative SLR, normal strength, range of motion, and normal neurologic examination. No atrophy.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Minor lumbar strain.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Since there are no objective findings at the time of the impairment evaluation, the individ- ual is assigned to lumbar DRE category I.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-2
5% to 8% Impairment Due to Lumbar Injury


Subject: 25-year-old man.
History: Onset of low back and left thigh pain while lifting on the job. Examination revealed muscle spasm, a positive SLR on the left at 60°, a positive crossed SLR at 70°, and an absent left Achilles tendon reflex. Treated with physical therapy, improved, and returned to work after 6 weeks.
Current Symptoms: No pain at rest or numbness in the lower extremities 1 year after onset. Able to perform all ADL; some back pain with heavy activity.
Physical Exam: Full range of motion of the lumbar spine. SLR: negative. Motor and sensory func- tions are normal.
Clinical Studies: MRI: left posterolateral disk herni- ation L5-S1.
Diagnosis: Left posterolateral disk herniation L5-S1 with left S1 radiculopathy, resolved.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: This individual had a radiographically confirmed herniated disk, at the level and side expected from the physical examination. Most symptoms resolved with conservative treatment. At the time of evaluation, the individual was doing well, with no evidence of residual radicu- lopathy.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-4
10% to 13% Impairment Due to Radiculopathy


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-3
10% to 13% Impairment Due to Surgically Treated Herniated Disk

Subject: 25-year-old man.
History: Onset of back and left posterior thigh and leg pain while twisting in a flexed position when lifting a moderately heavy package. Initially pre- sented with muscle spasm, a positive SLR on the side at 60°, a positive crossed SLR at 70°, and an absent left Achilles tendon reflex. Treatment with physical therapy did not produce significant improvement. Underwent surgical diskectomy 3 months after the injury. Improved and returned to work without restrictions after 4 months of reha- bilitation.
Current Symptoms: No pain at rest or numbness in the lower extremities 8 months after injury. Able to do most ADL but complains of back pain with heavy activity.
Physical Exam: Full range of motion of the lumbar spine. Loss of the Achilles reflex but normal motor and sensory functions. SLR: negative.
Clinical Studies: Original MRI: herniated disk at L5-S1. No additional studies have been done.
Diagnosis: Left posterolateral herniated disk at L5- S1 with left S1 radiculopathy, partially resolved status postdiskectomy.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Symptoms, physical findings, and imag- ing studies are all consistent with a symptomatic herniated disk. Most symptoms and signs resolved with surgical treatment.
---END EXAMPLE---
Subject: 25-year-old man.
History: New onset of back and left leg pain while lifting on the job. Initially presented with muscle spasm, a positive SLR on the left side at 60°, a positive crossed SLR at 70°, and an absent left Achilles tendon reflex. An MRI revealed a left posterolateral disk herniation at L5-S1. Was treated with analgesics and physical therapy but did not improve. Underwent surgical diskectomy 3 months after the injury. Some improvement in the symptoms after 9 months of rehabilitation.
Current Symptoms: Persistent back and thigh pain and numbness along the lateral side of the foot at rest. Unable to do his usual recreational and some household activities.
Physical Exam: Restricted lumbar motion. Loss of the Achilles reflex, numbness in the S1 nerve root distribution, and pain in the posterior thigh and leg on SLR.
Clinical Studies: Original MRI: herniated disk at
L5-S1. Postoperative MRI with gadolinium: fibro- sis but no residual or recurrent herniation.
Diagnosis: Chronic low back pain and radiculopathy.
Impairment Rating: 13% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Symptoms, physical findings, and imag- ing studies are all consistent with a symptomatic herniated disk. Symptoms did not completely resolve after surgical treatment, with subjective and objective signs of persistent radiculopathy.
Individual therefore qualifies for DRE lumbar cat- egory III. Because of significant persistent symp- toms that limit the ability to perform ADL and continued objective findings, the impairment rat- ing is increased to 13%.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-5
20% to 23% Impairment Due to Fracture With Greater Than 50% Compression of Vertebrae

Subject: 54-year-old woman.
History: Fell from a ladder and sustained a burst fracture of L2 with a 55% loss of height, without neurologic findings. Treated with bracing, the fracture healed; returned to most ADL 6 months after the injury.
Current Symptoms: No neurologic complaints, but has back pain after heavy activity or with weather changes.
Physical Exam: Mild tenderness to palpation at the fracture site. Neurologic examination and SLR: negative. Range of motion is mildly decreased.
Clinical Studies: Radiograph: fracture healed with 60% loss of height.
Diagnosis: Burst fracture L2 > 50%.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Individual qualifies for lumbar DRE cat- egory IV based on the fracture. Neurologic deficit, if present, would warrant category V or Section 15.7. If she had multiple compression fractures in the same or different spinal regions, use the ROM method for rating.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-6
25% to 28% Impairment Due to Radiculopathy and Alteration of Motion Segment Integrity

Subject: 25-year-old man.
History: Onset of back and left leg pain after a fall on a concrete surface while carrying a box.
Initially presented with muscle spasm, an SLR on the left side at 60°, a positive crossed SLR at 70°, and an absent left Achilles tendon reflex. Treated with physical therapy but did not improve.
Underwent surgical diskectomy and arthrodesis of L5-S1 3 months after the injury. After 9 months of rehabilitation, leg and back symptoms were diminished but persistent.
Current Symptoms: Back and thigh pain at rest and persistent numbness along the lateral side of the foot 1 year after the onset of symptoms. Pain and numbness prevent individual from maintaining a constant position, prolonged standing or walking, or performing his prior work, recreational, and some household activities.
Physical Exam: Severely restricted range of motion. Loss of the Achilles reflex. Numbness in the S1 nerve root distribution and dermatomal pain in the leg on SLR.
Clinical Studies: Original MRI: a severely degener- ated L5-S1 disk with a herniation on the left side. Postoperative MRI with gadolinium: fibrosis, but no residual or recurrent herniation. Fusion appears solid.
Diagnosis: Left posterolateral disk herniation L5-S1 with S1 radiculopathy and severe disk degenera- tion, unresolved status postdiskectomy and L5-S1 fusion.
Impairment Rating: 28% impairment of the whole person.


Comment: Symptoms, physical findings, and imag- ing studies are all consistent with a symptomatic herniated disk. Excision of the offending disk and a single-level fusion did not relieve all symptoms, which are supported by signs of a persistent radiculopathy. Individual qualifies for lumbar DRE category V because he has persistent radicu- lopathy as well as single-level alteration of motion segment integrity.
15.5
 DRE: Thoracic Spine
Thoracic problems are evaluated as follows:
---END EXAMPLE---
For thoracic spine problems localized to the thoracic region, use Table 15-4. If the thoracic pathology also leads to isolated bowel or bladder dysfunction not due to corticospinal damage, obtain the appropriate estimates for bowel and bladder dysfunction listed in the gastrointestional and urology chapters and combine these with the thoracic spine DRE category (I-V) listed in Table 15-4. If the thoracic spine prob- lem is due to corticospinal tract involvement, use Section 15.7. If thoracic injury–related bowel or bladder symptoms exist without verifiable lower extremity involvement, then appropriate estimates for bowel and bladder impairments from the Guides chapters on the urinary and reproductive and diges- tive systems should be combined (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) with an impairment percent from one of the thoracic categories II through V.

The thoracic spine impairment DRE categories are summarized in Table 15-4.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-7
0% Impairment Due to Thoracic Injury

Subject: 44-year-old man.
History: Working from home spending many hours on the phone and computer.

Current Symptoms: Chronic, bilateral, upper back discomfort under the scapula area worsened 3 to 4 months ago, but unchanged since. Feels better when not working at the computer.
Physical Exam: Hunched posture. Minimal tender- ness to deep palpation over the descending trapez- ius muscles and the periscapular area, right side more pronounced. Otherwise normal examination.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Upper back pain.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.


Comment: The individual was educated concerning the importance of proper posture, an appropriate workstation, and the need for stretching and strengthening exercises to alleviate the temporary discomfort.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-8
5% to 8% Impairment Due to Thoracic Injury

Subject: 56-year-old man.
History: Laborer with prior history of multiple mus- culoskeletal injuries during college football, from which he had fully recovered. Developed severe right-sided, radiating arm pain with tingling along the chest and the underside of the right arm while moving a refrigerator. Most of the pain has disap- peared, but individual still has some discomfort when lifting the right arm above shoulder level.
Current Symptoms: Persistent numbness along the medial right arm.
Physical Exam: Numbness along a T1-3 der- matomal area in chest, not clearly defined.
Clinical Studies: MRI: degenerative disk changes at T1-2. Radiographs: osteophyte T1, T2 levels.
Diagnosis: Degenerative disk disease T1.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Impairment rating would increase by up to 3% if individual was unable to do ADL as indi- cated in Table 1-2.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-9
15% to 18% Impairment Due to Thoracic Injury


Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: Individual fell from the second floor of a building on which he was working and sustained a compression fracture of T8. After conservative treatment, able to perform most ADL and walk without braces or crutches.
Current Symptoms: Minor back pain with heavy physical activity. Left lower extremity weakness and numbness in the left leg.
Physical Exam: Spotty numbness in the left leg and grade 4/5 left leg weakness. Measurable atrophy of left thigh and leg. Left leg reflexes are slightly hypoactive.
Clinical Studies: Compression fracture of T8 with loss of height of the vertebral body of about 30%.
Diagnosis: Compression fracture T8 with residual left lower extremity neurologic involvement.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: This individual qualifies for DRE tho- racic category III because of his ongoing neuro- logic deficits and structural inclusion of a compression fracture with 25% to 50% loss
of height.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-10
20% to 23% Impairment Due to Compression Fracture of T1

Subject: 56-year-old-man.
History: Truck driver in motor vehicle accident was unconscious and had a seizure. Improved with physical therapy. Able to drive again and do usual ADL. No further seizures; off medication.
Current Symptoms: Bilateral upper extremity heav- iness and weakness.
Physical Exam: Numbness over T1 distribution bilaterally; weakness of the intrinsic hand mus- cles.
Clinical Studies: 65% compression fracture of T1.
Diagnosis: Compression fracture of T1 with bilateral radiculopathy. New onset seizure disorder.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment due to mus- culoskeletal disorder; combine with appropriate rating due to the seizure disorder to determine whole person impairment (see Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Comment: No additional impairment since he is doing well.
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-11
25% to 28% Impairment Due to Radiculopathy and Alteration of Motion Segment Integrity

Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: Individual fell from the second floor of a building on which he was working and sustained a compression fracture of T8. He had minor right lower extremity weakness and numbness. After anterior surgical decompression and instrumented fusion from T7 through T9 he improved and was able to return to most ADL and walk without braces or crutches, but he still had weakness and patchy numbness in the right lower extremity.
Current Symptoms: Minor pain on heavy activity.
Physical Exam: Neurologically, spotty numbness in the right lower extremity with 4/5 weakness and mild atrophy of the right thigh and leg muscles. Right lower extremity reflexes are slightly hyper- active.
Clinical Studies: MRI: compression fracture T8 without canal compromise. Radiograph: treated fracture with fusion.
Diagnosis: Compression fracture T8 treated surgi- cally with mild residual right lower extremity neurologic involvement.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person by DRE method; another option is to use the ROM method.
Comment: This individual qualifies for DRE tho- racic category V because he has mild right lower extremity neurologic deficits (category III) and alteration of motion segment integrity given the fusion (category IV). A combination of categories III and IV in the thoracic region means that the individual qualifies for category V. Because he has alteration of motion segment integrity of more than one level (multilevel fusion), he could also be rated by the ROM method. The best approach would be to rate the individual by both methods and award the higher rating.
---END EXAMPLE---

15.6  DRE: Cervical Spine
15.6a Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Cervical Disorders
For cervical problems localized to the cervical or cervicothoracic region, use Table 15-5. If the cervical spine problem also leads to isolated bowel and/or bladder dysfunction not due to corticospinal damage, obtain the appropriate estimates for bowel and


bladder dysfunction from the gastrointestinal and urology chapters (Chapters 6 and 7) and combine these with the appropriate cervical spine DRE cate- gory from DRE I to V, listed in Table 15-5. If the cer- vical spine problem is due to corticospinal tract involvement, use Table 15-6 alone.

The DRE cervical categories are summarized in Table 15-5.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-12
0% Impairment Due to Cervical Injury

Subject: 37-year-old man.
History: Complaints of neck discomfort when paint- ing.
Current Symptoms: Intermittent neck pain, occa- sionally extending into upper back bilaterally, moreso on the left side.
Physical Exam: Full neck motion, but pain at the extremes; some tenderness over the trapezius muscles; no spasm; no neurologic findings.
Clinical Studies: Radiographs: normal cervical spine.
Diagnosis: Intermittent cervical neck strain.
Impairment Rating: 0% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: No evidence of permanent impairment, without objective signs. Advised to do appropriate stretching and neck exercises regularly, before and after vigorous activity.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-13
5% to 8% Impairment Due to Cervical Injury


Subject: 37-year-old woman.
History: Pain in the neck and lateral right upper extremity extending to the thumb following a rear-end auto collision. An MRI showed a herni- ated disk at C6. She elected nonoperative treat- ment and recovered after 18 months.
Current Symptoms: Some residual neck pain with physical activity; upper limb symptoms have resolved.
Physical Exam: Slight loss of motion of the cervical spine. Neurologic examination is normal.
Clinical Studies: Initial MRI: right posterolateral disk herniation at C5. No additional imaging stud- ies were done.
Diagnosis: Herniated disk C5-6 with resolved right C6 radiculopathy.
Impairment Rating: 5% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The individual qualifies for DRE cervi- cal category II because she had a radiculopathy caused by a herniated disk that responded to treat- ment. She has no significant residual signs.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-15
25% to 28% Impairment Due to Alterations of Motion Segment Integrity


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-14
15% to 18% Impairment Due to Radiculopathy

Subject: 44-year-old man.
History: Sustained a blow to his posterior neck from a machine support that slipped. Unable to use his dominant left hand for ADL without considerable pain in neck, left upper back, and ulnar left upper limb. No discomfort in the lower extremities.
Refuses surgery.
Current Symptoms: Neck pain, radiating to the ulnar hand with numbness of the ring and little fingers.
Physical Exam: Decreased range of motion in the neck with severe radiating pain to the left arm in a C6 distribution.
Clinical Studies: MRI: left posterolateral disk herni- ation C7-8.
Diagnosis: Radiculopathy due to disk herniation C6.
Impairment Rating: 18% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Residual symptoms and functional limi- tations to perform ADL.
---END EXAMPLE---
Subject: 37-year-old woman.
History: Onset of pain in the neck and right arm along the radial aspect and into the thumb follow- ing a medium-speed rear-end auto collision.
Individual failed conservative treatment, and an MRI showed a herniated disk at C6-7. Underwent a diskectomy of the sixth cervical disk and fusion of C6 to C7. Healed uneventfully and returned to work 4 months after the injury.
Current Symptoms: Occasional neck pain with physical activity. Upper extremity pain resolved.
Physical Exam: Slight loss of cervical spine motion.
Neurologic examination is normal.
Clinical Studies: Radiographs: healed C6-7 fusion.
Diagnosis: Herniated disk C6-7 with C7 radiculopa- thy resolved following anterior cervical diskec- tomy and C6-7 fusion.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: This individual meets criteria for DRE cervical category IV because of alteration of motion segment integrity due to fusion.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-16
35% to 38% Impairment Due to Herniated Cervical Disk Postdiskectomy and Fusion

Subject: 37-year-old woman.
History: Individual fell and struck her posterior head and neck on a conveyor machine while working on an assembly line. She had severe and persistent pain in the neck and lateral right upper limb extending into the thumb. An MRI showed a her- niated disk at C5-6. She failed nonoperative treat- ment and underwent a diskectomy of the sixth cervical disk and fusion of C6 to C7. She has con- tinued neck and bilateral upper extremity pain.
Unable to perform most ADL and uses assistive devices for gripping and turning objects.
Current Symptoms: Severe neck and bilateral upper extremity pain aggravated by movements of the neck and use of the upper extremities.
Persistent numbness in the radial forearm, hand, and digits on both sides.
Physical Exam: Slight loss of cervical motion.
Neurologic examination reveals decreased sensa- tion in the thumb and index finger and weakness of the biceps and wrist extensors bilaterally.
Diminished brachioradialis reflexes, right worse than left.
Clinical Studies: Radiographs: healed fusion.
Diagnosis: Herniated C5-6 disk treated with residual bilateral C6 radiculopathy.
Impairment Rating: 38% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: This individual meets criteria for both DRE cervical category III, with a surgically treated radiculopathy, and DRE cervical category IV, because of alteration of motion segment integrity due to the fusion, and is placed in DRE category V because of objective findings support- ive of significant upper extremity impairment requiring the use of adaptive devices.
15.7
Rating
Corticospinal
	Tract Damage
The neurologic level of involvement is determined by identifying the level of cord involvement, not nec- essarily the same level as a fracture, because the root function at the fracture level frequently returns with time. The level of cord involvement is determined by identifying the lowest normally functioning nerve root. Identifying the level of nerve root function helps to determine the degree of residual function.
Figure 15-5 illustrates the relationship of nerve roots to the vertebral level.
---END EXAMPLE---

The level at which nerve roots exit the spine relative to the verte- brae. The neurologic level of involvement is determined by identify- ing the lowest normally functioning nerve root.


In prior editions of the Guides, rating spinal cord injury was done either through a combination of DRE categories or in the nervous system chapter. It was decided in this edition to evaluate spinal cord injuries based on the criteria in the nervous system chapter (Chapter 13). These criteria are repeated in this section. For bilateral neurologic or corticospinal tract damage, consultation with a spinal cord injury specialist and review of Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System, is recommended. Thus, for an individual with a spinal cord injury affecting the upper extremities, use Table 15-6 and the appro- priate impairment rating for impairment of one or both upper extremities. For impairments involving loss of use of the lower extremities, use the section in Table 15-6 pertaining to station and gait impair- ment. If there is additional bowel or bladder dysfunc- tion, combine the upper extremity or lower extremity loss with impairments in bladder, anorectal, and/or neurologic sexual impairment as warranted.

Once a class has been selected, the exact value is obtained by combining the value with the correspon- ding additional impairment from DRE categories II through V for cervical and lumbar impairment and DRE categories II through IV for thoracic impair- ment. An exact value is determined based on the degree of impairment of ADL. Table 15-6 and the following examples illustrate the method for impair- ment rating of spinal cord injury.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-17
69% Impairment Due to Compression Fracture With Corticospinal Tract Damage

Subject: 28-year-old man.
History: Sustained a C6 vertebral body fracture with almost 40% compression after a fall from a scaf- fold. Had loss of bladder control and weakness of both lower extremities. He also had numbness and


weakness of both upper extremities, which was verified as a C7-level radiculopathy by positive sharp waves on the electromyogram in three arm muscles 4 weeks after the injury. Underwent cor- pectomy of C6 and a fusion from C5 to C7.
Current Symptoms: Pain free with numbness and weakness of upper extremities; no remaining bladder symptoms. Unable to walk without leg braces (orthoses).
Physical Exam: Mild sensory changes from C7 dis- tally. C6-innervated muscles function normally, but he had weakness of muscles innervated by C7 and lower nerve roots.
Clinical Studies: Neurodiagnostic studies: see above; radiographs show a solid fusion from C5 through C7.
Diagnosis: C6 compression fracture with corti- cospinal tract damage.

Impairment Rating: 69% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Although this man has a vertebral frac- ture, his corticospinal tract involvement indicates he should be rated using the neurology tables.
His numbness, weakness, and difficulty with dex- terity movements of both upper extremities war- rant a 39% WPI. He is unable to walk without braces, indicating a class 3 WPI of 39%. He has no bowel or bladder dysfunction. His vertebral fracture results in a DRE III, or 15% impairment. Combining 39%, 39%, and 15% WPI using the Combined Values Chart results in a 69% WPI.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-18
78% Impairment Due to Burst Fracture With Cauda
Equina Syndrome

Subject: 54-year-old woman.
History: Fell from a ladder and sustained a burst fracture of L2 with a loss of height of 35%. In addition to numbness and weakness of both lower extremities, she was unable to empty her bladder and required catheterization. Following anterior decompression of the cauda equina and fusion from L1 to L3, the fractures healed, and she regained partial function in the muscles inner- vated by the L2 and lower nerve roots.
Current Symptoms: Persistent weakness of both lower extremities requiring the use of ankle-foot orthoses. Walks using two crutches. Requires intermittent catheterization of her bladder. She has occasional bowel incontinence.
Physical Exam: Mild tenderness to palpation at the fracture site. Neurologic examination reveals weakness of L2 to S1 innervated muscle and numbness and atrophy of both lower extremities. Decreased rectal tone. Knee and ankle reflexes are absent.
Clinical Studies: Repeat x-rays of the region: solid fusion from L1 to L3.
Diagnosis: Burst fracture L2 with cauda equina syn- drome.
Impairment Rating: 78% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Her lower extremity weakness and use of orthoses and crutches indicate a class 3, or 39%, WPI. The bladder impairment, requiring intermittent catheterization, indicates a class 4, or 50%, WPI. Her rectal tone is deceased, with occa- sional bowel incontinence, indicating a class 2 anorectal impairment of 20%. The burst fracture
receives a DRE lumbar category III rating of 10%. Combining 50%, 39%, 20%, and 10% results in a combined whole person impairment of 78%.
15.8
Range-of-Motion
	Method
Although called the range-of-motion method, this evaluation method actually consists of three elements that need to be assessed: (1) the range of motion of the impaired spine region; (2) accompanying diag- noses (Table 15-7); and (3) any spinal nerve deficit, which is described in this chapter and in Chapter 13 (The Central and Peripheral Nervous System).
Mobility, diagnoses, and nerve root deficits all pro- vide important clinical information about function of an individual’s spine.15-21 An impairment rating based on loss of motion is valid only if there is medical evi- dence of a documented injury or illness with a per- manent anatomic and/or physiologic residual dysfunction. The whole person impairment rating is obtained by combining ratings from all three compo- nents, using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
---END EXAMPLE---
All impairment estimates shown in the tables of this section are expressed as whole person impairments. Section 15.13 explains how to express a whole per- son spine impairment as a regional spine impair- ment. Tables 15-8 through 15-14 provide estimates for rating ankylosis and range of motion, while neu- rologic impairments are rated based on Tables 15-15 through 15-18. The data on standards and normal functioning described in this section are based on both medical studies and consensus judgments.15,18-27

As previously stated (Section 15.2) the ROM method should be used only (1) if the DRE method is not applicable (no verifiable injury); (2) if, after obtain- ing the history and performing the examination, the physician cannot place the individual within a multi- level DRE category; (3) if multilevel involvement and/or alteration of motion segment integrity has occurred in the same spinal region; (4) if there is recurrent radiculopathy caused by a new (recurrent) disk herniation or a recurrent injury in the same spinal region; (5) if there are multiple episodes of other pathology producing alteration of motion seg- ment integrity and/or radiculopathy; or (6) if statuto- rily mandated by the involved jurisdiction.


Concerns have been raised by users of the Guides regarding perceived age- and gender-related variations in the normal population, which may bias impair- ments in favor of males or older individuals, both of whom are perceived to be less flexible and therefore may be judged “impaired” even under normal circum- stances. Since preparation of the fourth edition, some scientific evidence has accumulated and several rele- vant articles have been identified.27-45

Regarding gender, the scientific evidence is inconsis- tent. The majority of studies actually show a non- significant trend toward greater motion for male normal individuals in each age group. The only movement showing any statistically significant gen- der difference is cervical extension, and then only in younger women. This finding is inconsistent among various studies, however, and the difference disap- pears with advancing age.35,41

There is a decrease in normal motion with advancing age, but the effect is not linear. Most studies examin- ing a wide spectrum of age groups find greater alter- ations in mobility below 20 and above 60 years of age. Several studies suggest that lifestyle factors may influence flexibility far more than inherent factors, as the variability of overall motion between individuals increases with advancing years. However, the evi- dence is inconsistent, and the changes in normative data too small for the most relevant age groups 20 to 59, to warrant age adjustment in this edition of the Guides.


15.8 a General ROM Method Measurement Principles
Impairment should be evaluated when the condition has stabilized after completion of all necessary med- ical, surgical, and rehabilitative treatment. This prin- ciple precludes rating an acute illness or injury. For example, if acute muscle spasm is present, this should be noted in the examiner’s report; however, the mobility measurements would not be valid for estimating permanent impairment. Because the Guides only considers permanent impairment, rating should be deferred until after any acute exacerbation of the chronic condition has subsided, ie, when the individual is at MMI (see Chapter 1 and the Glossary).

Pain, fear of injury, disuse, or neuromuscular inhibi- tion may limit mobility by diminishing the individ- ual’s effort, leading to inaccurately low and inconsistent measurements. The physician should seek consistency when testing active motion, strength, and sensation. Tests with inconsistent results should be repeated. Results that remain inconsistent should be disregarded. When the physio- logic measurements fail to match known pathology, they should be repeated and, if still inconsistent, dis- allowed until documented evidence is provided for the abnormalities noted on the physical examination.

The reproducibility (precision) of an individual’s performance is one (but not the sole) indicator of optimum effort. When measuring range of motion, the examiner should obtain at least three consecutive measurements and calculate the mean (average) of the three. Measurements should not change substan- tially with repeated efforts. If the average is less than 50°, three consecutive measurements must fall within 5° of the mean; if the average is greater than 50°, three consecutive measurements must fall within 10% of the mean. Motion testing may be repeated up to six times to obtain three consecutive measurements that meet these criteria. If after six measurements inconsistency persists, the spinal motions are considered invalid. The measurements and accompanying impairment estimates may then be disallowed, in part or in their entirety.

There are multiple potential sources of error in a quantitative physical examination.17,20,21 The greatest source of error that occurs is due to test administrator inexperience or lack of knowledge. The evaluator should also ensure adequate warm-up movements have been performed.16 When possible, the individual being evaluated should warm up prior to the ROM measurements: flexion and extension twice, left and right rotation twice, left and right lateral bending twice, and one additional flexion and extension. The warm-up movements do not need to be repeated before each subsequent test of motions of the same spinal region.


The physician also needs to ensure the anatomical landmarks are accurate, the body part is stabilized, the measurement device is properly stabilized on the spine, and appropriate instructions are provided to the individual.17,20,21 If these principles are followed, errors due to examination technique, the measure- ment device itself, or normal human variability will be minimized.


15.8 b Principles of Inclinometry and Spine Motion Measurement
Since spinal motion is compound, it is essential to measure simultaneously motion of both the upper and lower extremes of the spine region being exam- ined. Because the small joints of the spine do not lend themselves readily to two-arm goniometric measurements and measuring a spine segment’s mobility is confounded by motion above and below the assessed points, an inclinometer is the preferred device for obtaining accurate, reproducible measure- ments in a simple, practical, and inexpensive way.
The subcutaneous bony structures that mark the upper and lower ends of the three spine regions can be palpated readily.

Inclinometers, also called angle finders or level indi- cators, are small angle-measuring devices tradition- ally used by carpenters, mechanics, and tradespeople. Recently, physicians, therapists, and veterinarians have used them to measure angles and ranges of motion in humans and animals. Inclinometers work like a plumb line, operating on the principle of grav- ity, which is a constant. An inclinometer used by a physician should be marked off in 2° increments or less and in good operating condition (Figure15-6). A mechanical inclinometer has a starting or 0° position indicated by a weighted needle or pendulum. A fluid level can cause errors in reading the meniscus. A fluid-filled inclinometer should allow rotation of its inclinometer face so any number on the face can be set as the initial position. Electronic inclinometers use gravity sensors to determine an angle from the verti- cal, and then perform internal calculations.21


Features of a properly designed inclinometer for medical use include a dial large enough to allow easy reading of 2° increments but small enough to enable application on the spine and all joints of the body; features to enable repeated, accurate application and stabilization of the instrument on the body; and a dial that can both display the 0° gravity position and be set by the examiner to a 0° starting position when the body part cannot be placed in a 0° gravity or neutral position.

Box 15-2 offers a partial list of companies that pro- duce or distribute inclinometers. The American Medical Association does not endorse or recommend any particular type or brand of inclinometer.


The following principles, discussed in greater detail by Mayer,17 by Gerhardt et al,20,21 and in forthcoming AMA educational material, are important to follow to obtain accurate measurements.

Gravitational plane. An inclinometer works only in the vertical position because only that plane allows the pointer or sensor to move freely in response to gravity. An inclinometer will not operate properly if tilted or at all when horizontal. Therefore, the indi- vidual being examined must be in a position that per- mits motion of the part being tested in a vertical plane. For spinal measurements in the sagittal and frontal (coronal) planes the individual should be standing or sitting, with the spine vertical (Figure
15-7). Measurements in the transverse or axial plane must be made with the individual in the supine, prone, or flexed hip position.

Measure spinal ROM in three principal planes: sagit- tal (extension-flexion), frontal or coronal, and trans- verse or axial (rotation) (Figure 15-7). If a spinal region has two or more impaired motions, the ratings for each range of motion impairment are added.
Impairments of two or more regions of the spine are
combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

Stabilization. If the caudad (superior), or lower, part of a spine region can be stabilized so it does not move when the superior, or upper, part moves, a sin- gle mechanical inclinometer may be used, as with measuring cervical rotation (see Figure 15-17).
However, two inclinometers are usually needed to measure most movements of the spine. Single elec- tronic inclinometers use microprocessors to duplicate functions of mechanical inclinometers. Their use
will not be described in detail here as information is available from the manufacturer. The user should ensure that the features described above are addressed.


15.8c Ankylosis and Motion With Ankylosis
Ankylosis is defined as the complete absence of joint motion and is expressed as a fixed position. In the spine, which has multiple motion segments in each region with vertebrae moving together and sepa- rately, complete absence of regional motion is rare. For spine impairment evaluation only, when an indi- vidual cannot reach the neutral (0°) position, the position or angle of restriction closest to neutral is considered the position of ankylosis or end-restricted movement.

If the individual has end-restricted movement, this value, taken as the ankylosis value, is used to deter- mine impairment instead of the ROM. If the motion crosses the neutral position in any plane, the exam- iner should use the abnormal motion section of the appropriate table to determine the impairment for that plane.


S: sagittal plane, T: transverse plane, F: frontal or coronal plane.


Manual pressure during use. The inclinometer should be held so it remains firmly applied to the subcutaneous skeletal structure while the spine is moving through the entire range of motion. It must not deviate from the original position because of skin movement or uneven pressure on the skin overlying the bony landmark, which might occur with an obese individual. The inclinometer design is important to allow proper application and avoid slippage on sub- cutaneous bony prominences. Firm contact of two points of the instrument with the structure is essen- tial, especially if a convex surface such as the sacrum or calvarium (top of the head) is involved.


Recording ROM Measurements
ROM measurements can be recorded on the sum- mary sheets (Figures 15-10, 15-15, and 15-18).

In determining ankylosis impairments, the examiner should add the ankylosis impairments in several planes within a single region or combine the ankylo- sis impairments of two or more regions (Combined Values Chart, p. 604). If a spinal region has several range-of-motion impairments and an ankylosis impairment, the ROM impairments are added and the total is combined with the ankylosis impairment.
Impairments of two or more regions are always com- bined (Combined Values Chart).


15.8d Estimating Whole Person Impairment Using the ROM Method
1. Determine whether the individual has reached MMI and the impairment is stable. If the condi- tion is changing or likely to improve substan- tially with medical treatment, the impairment is not permanent and should not be rated. If it is permanent, proceed to step 2.
2. Select the impaired region: cervical, thoracic, or lumbar.
3. Use Table 15-7 to determine the percentage impairment for the part of the ROM diagnosis– based method. If there are two or more diag- noses within a spinal region, use that which is most significant. This percent will be combined with those for the impaired range(s) of motion and the whole person neurologic deficit (steps 7-9 below).


4. Measure the range of motion in the relevant sagittal, frontal (coronal), and transverse planes (Figure 15-7), and determine any angle of anky- losis or any restricted motion that is present.
5. Perform at least three measurements of each motion. Determine which measurements meet reproducibility criteria described under general measurement principles described in Section
15.8b. Calculate the average of each set of three measurements and determine whether the three measurements in each set fall within 5° or 10% of the mean, whichever is larger.
6. If the measurements do not meet the consistency requirements described in step 5, perform addi- tional tests until the reproducibility criteria are satisfied, up to a maximum of six. If the test results remain inconsistent after six measure- ments, repeat the tests at a later date or disallow impairment related to that motion.
7. Use the maximum motion from a reproducible set of measurements to determine any impair- ment rating from the appropriate tables, based on the spinal region and type of movement. Refer to Section 15.8c, Ankylosis and Motion With Ankylosis, if there are several range-of- motion or ankylosis impairments in a region. For example, an individual who can flex the cervical spine from 30° to 60° but who lacks 30° of motion in reaching the neutral 0° position has restricted end motion and the same estimated impairment as if he or she had fixed ankylosis at 30° of cervical flexion. According to Table 15- 12, the individual’s impairment is 30% of the whole person. If there are impairments due to loss of motion in more than one plane in the same spinal region (extension, flexion, or rota- tion), the impairments are added to determine total impairment due to loss of motion in a spinal region.
8. Determine any impairments due to neurologic deficits, such as radiculopathy or spinal nerve injury. Refer to Table 15-15 for the procedure to evaluate the sensory deficit. Use Table 15-16 to determine the procedure for estimating loss of strength. Apply these tables to Table 15-17 (cer- vical and thoracic nerve roots) or Table 15-18 (lumbar and sacral nerve roots) as needed. Convert the neurologic impairments, initially calculated as upper or lower extremity, into a whole person impairment.
9.
Combine the diagnosis-based (Table 15-7) and physical examination–based (mobility and neuro- logic) impairment percents using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
10. Repeat steps 1 through 9 for either of the other two spinal regions with significant involvement related to the primary diagnosis.
11. Combine the regional impairments into a single whole person impairment using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
12. Combine the whole person spine impairment with whole person ratings for any other organ system using the Combined Values Chart, if indicated.
13. Record the results of the evaluation on the Spine Impairment Summary form (see Table 15-20).


Instructions for Using Table 15-7
1. Use this table only when the ROM method is used.
2. Identify the most significant (impairing) diagno- sis of the primarily involved region (lumbar, tho- racic, or cervical).
3. The diagnosis-based impairment percent should be combined with range-of-motion impairment estimates and whole person impairment esti- mates involving sensation, weakness, and other conditions of the musculoskeletal, nervous, or other organ systems.
4. Combine the diagnosis-based, range-of-motion, and other whole person impairment estimates using the Spine Impairment Summary form (Table 15-20).
5. Repeat for other involved spine regions and combined regional impairments if those exist.


* The phrase “medically documented injury, pain, and rigidity” implies not only that an injury or illness has occurred but also that the condition is stable, as shown by the evaluator’s history, examination, and other diagnostic data, and that a permanent impairment exists, which is at least partially due to the condition being evaluated.

† Structural tests include radiographs, myelograms with and without CT scan, CT scan and MRI with and without contrast, and diskogram with and without CT scan.


15.9  ROM: Lumbar Spine
15.9 a Flexion and Extension
Two-Inclinometer Technique
1. Provide information about the test and allow warm-up within pain tolerance. Warm-up exer- cises, as described in Section 15.8a, are done as tolerated by the individual, based on physician judgment.
2. The individual should be standing with knees extended and weight balanced on both feet, ideally with hands on hips for support to permit greater motion. The spine should be in the neutral position while the inclinometers are set at 0° (See Figure 15-8a). Locate and place horizontal skin marks


over the T12 spinous process and the sacrum. Center the first inclinometer aligned in the sagittal plane, over the mark for the T12 spinous process. Center the second inclinometer over the sacral hor- izontal mark. It is generally best to place the sacral mark at the midpoint of the posterior superior iliac spine because if the mark is placed too high on the sacral convexity, the inclinometer may be dis- placed during extension. Be certain of the bony landmarks.
3. Instruct the individual to flex the trunk as far as possible (Figure 15-8b), again recording both inclinometer angles and subtracting the sacral (hip) from the T12 inclinometer angle to obtain true lumbar flexion angle. Ask the individual to return the trunk to the neutral position.


c.	d.


4. Ask the individual to extend maximally while holding the inclinometers firmly, and record both angles (Figure 15-8c). Subtract the sacral (hip) inclination from the T12 inclinometer angle to obtain the true lumbar extension angle. Return the trunk to the neutral position (verify that the incli- nometers are still at 0°).
5. Repeat the procedure at least three times and at most six times for flexion and extension to obtain a valid measurement set (three consecutive, repro- ducible measurements). Only the true lumbar spine flexion and extension angles need to be con- sistently measured within 5° if the average is less than 50°, or within 10° if the average is greater than 50°. The impairment is based on the maxi- mum true extension and flexion angles from within the three measurements. The average of the three is only used to determine consistency.
6. An accessory validity test can be performed for lumbosacral flexion and extension.35 In this test, record the straight-leg-raising angle of the supine individual by placing an inclinometer on each tib- ial crest with the knees extended and the hip flexed (Figure 15-8d). Compare the straight-leg-raising angle to the sum of the sacral flexion and exten- sion (sacral or hip motion) angles (Figures 15-9a and 15-9c). If the straight-leg-raising angle exceeds the sum of sacral flexion and extension angles by more than 15°, the lumbosacral flexion test is invalid. Normally, the straight-leg-
raising angle is about the same as the sum of the sacral flexion-extension angle. If the individual resists passive SLR without other evidence of radiculopathy, the accessory test is also invalid. If invalid, the examiner should either repeat the flexion-extension test or disallow impairment for lumbosacral spine flexion and extension.

Tightest SLR – [sacral flexion + sacral extension]
? 15° for validity (assumes sacral flexion and extension are less than normal).

Note: This accessory validity test is useful only when sacral flexion plus extension is less than the average for normal individuals (ie, 65° for women and 55° for men). At these levels or above, the difference between sacral motion and supine straight leg raising will usually exceed 15° because the hamstring and gluteal muscles are contracted in the standing flexed position and relaxed in the supine position. However, below the threshold of 65° for women and 55° for men, the tightest supine straight-leg-raising angle should not be more than 15° greater than the com- bined sacral (hip) flexion and extension angle in the standing position.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example of the accessory validity test: A
40-year-old man has a lumbar extension and flex- ion of 10° and 60°, respectively, with a sacral extension angle of 10° and sacral flexion meas- urement of 20°. Total sacral motion is 20° + 10°, or 30°. The straight-leg-raising angle is 70°. The measured left straight-leg-raising angle is the tighter one, 70°. The difference between 70° and 30° is greater than 15°, which indicates the results are invalid. The validity test is applicable because the individual’s total sacral motion, 30°, is less than the normal 55°. The examiner has the choice of either encouraging the individual to repeat the test with greater effort or invalidating (disallow- ing) any finding of lumbar spine ROM impair- ment in the sagittal plane.
7. Once obtaining the lumbar flexion and extension, use Table 15-8 to determine impairment of the whole person. Notice that when interpreting Table 15-8, the physician must take into account the sacral (hip) flexion angle when assessing impair- ment due to limited lumbar spine flexion because individuals with limited hip flexion have increased impairment with limited lumbar flexion.


Ankylosis
Ankylosis in the lumbosacral spine is rare. It is important mainly if immobility occurs in both the hips and lumbar spine, so the neutral position cannot be attained in the sagittal plane.

Isolated fusion of either a hip or two or more lumbar vertebrae places larger stresses on adjacent segments but does not lead to mechanical failure of the lum- bosacral region. Ankylosis impairments related to fusion of the hip or part of the hip motion complex should be evaluated according to Table 15-8 on abnormal motion of the lumbosacral region.


* Use this table only if the sum of sacral (hip) flexion and sacral (hip) extension is within 15° of the straight-leg-raising test on the tighter side; see text.

Lateral Bending (Flexion):
Two-Inclinometer Technique
1. Provide information to the individual about the procedure and allow for the appropriate warm-up exercises.
2. With the individual standing erect with knees extended, locate and place horizontal skin marks over the T12 spinous process and the sacrum. Verify with the inclinometer that the skin marks are truly horizontal; do not rely solely on visual assessment. Place the first inclinometer aligned in the frontal (coronal) plane over the T12 spinous process and hold the second over the sacrum (Figure 15-9a). The trunk should be in the neutral position while the inclinometers show gravity
at 0°.
3. Instruct the individual to bend the trunk laterally to the left and record both angles. Subtract the sacral (hip) inclination angle from the T12 incli- nation angle to determine the lumbar left lateral angle. Ask the individual to return to the neutral position.


a. neutral position	b. lateral bending


4. Instruct the individual to bend the trunk to the right as far as possible (Figure 15-9b), again recording both inclinometer angles and subtract- ing the sacral (hip) angle from the T12 inclinome- ter angle to obtain the lumbar right lateral bending angle. Ask the individual to return to the neutral position.
5. Repeat the procedure at least three times per side. To be valid, three of six consecutive measure- ments must lie within 5° or 10% of the mean, whichever is greater. The impairment estimate is based on the highest (least impairing) angle of a valid set. The mean is used only for a test of reproducibility.

With measurements for left and right lateral bending and any ankylosis, use Table 15-9 to determine the whole person impairment.

Add the impairments within the lumbar region. If other regions are impaired, the lumbar impairment should be combined with the other region impair- ment using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).


Physical Exam: Measured T12 angles for left lateral bending are 20°, 20°, 30°, and 25°. Corresponding sacral (hip) lateral flexion measurements to the right are 15°, 5°, 10°, and 10°. Subtracting the sacral bending measurements, the true lum- bosacral left lateral flexion angles are 5°, 15°, 20°, and 15°, respectively. The first measurement is discarded, being more than 5° less than the mean of 13.75°, but the next three measurements fulfill reproducibility criteria. The best left lateral bending angle is 20°.
Diagnosis: Chronic low back pain.
Impairment Rating: 1% impairment due to loss of left lateral bending (Table 15-9). Obtain the other ROM measurements for the lumbar spine and add the ROM impairments.


Ankylosis
Ankylosis in lumbar spine lateral bending (flexion) is generally associated with a scoliosis and usually produces only limited impairment. Mark the T12 and spinous process and sacrum, and ask the individual to stand in the most erect position possible that cor- rects the deformity. Using measurements made in the frontal (coronal) plane, subtract the sacral (hip) incli- nation from the T12 inclination and record the anky- losis angle or the angle of restriction (closest to the 0° neutral position). Consult Table 15-9 for the impairment rating.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-19
1% Impairment Due to Loss of Left Lateral Bending

Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Persisting back pain, worse over the last year; no specific injury identified.
Current Symptoms: Lumbar pain increases with standing or walking for more than 1 hour.

Figure 15-10 provides a measurement template for lumbar impairment evaluation using the ROM method.


* If ankylosis is present, combine the ankylosis impairment with the range-of-motion impairment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

If ankyloses in several planes are present, combine the ankylosis estimates (Combined Values Chart), then combine the result with the range-of-motion impairment.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-20
15% Impairment Due to Limitation (Ankylosis)
of Lateral Bending

Subject: 40-year-old man.
History: Fell from a ladder, landed on his buttocks, and fractured L3 and L4 vertebrae with wedging toward the left side.
Current Symptoms: Low back pain after heavy lift- ing, with radiating pain to the knee.
Physical Exam: Leaning to the left; cannot straighten his back to a neutral position.
Clinical Studies: Inclinometric measurements show his starting position is at 20° of left lateral bend- ing with further motion to 30°. The 20° is closest to the neutral position and is considered an anky- losis of 20° for rating purposes. Use the Ankylosis section of Table 15-9.
Diagnosis: Compression fractures of L3 and L4 with apex left lateral wedging.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person due to limitation (ankylosis) of lateral bending.
Comment: Add to this any impairments for other ROM deficits in the lumbar spine, then combine the total ROM impairment with those for the com- pression fractures (Table 15-7) and neurologic deficits, if any.
---END EXAMPLE---
15.10 ROM: Thoracic
	Spine
15.10 a Flexion and Extension
Thoracic flexion and extension are relatively limited motions. The amount of extension is determined mainly by the individual’s posture and the degree of fixed kyphosis or curvature of the thoracic spine. To determine the ranges of motion of this region, the individual is measured in the military brace posture to obtain the angle of extension or minimum kypho- sis. Then, with the individual fully flexing the tho- racic spine, the flexion angle is determined. The angle of minimum kyphosis is actually a measure of ankylosis, and impairment resulting from deformity corresponding to this angle is found in the Ankylosis part of Table 15-10.


Two-Inclinometer Technique
1. Provide information to the individual, and allow for the appropriate warm-up exercises. Measurements are obtained with the individual standing or sitting.
2. Locate and place horizontal skin marks over the T1 and T12 spinous processes. Place both incli- nometers, which do not show gravity 0 automati- cally against a true vertical surface, such as a wall, and set the neutral 0° positions. Place the inclinometers over the T1 and T12 spinous processes while instructing the individual to main- tain the maximally extended military brace pos- ture position (Figures 15-11a and 15-11c). Subtract the T12 inclinometer reading from the T1 inclinometer reading (if both are inclined in the same direction from the vertical) to obtain the angle of minimum kyphosis. If T12 and T1 are inclined in opposite directions from the vertical, add the angles. Find the impairment percent in the Ankylosis part of Table 15-10.
3.
Set the inclinometers to 0° with the individual standing in the erect military brace posture. Then ask the individual to fully flex the thoracic spine. Flexing at the hips is permitted. Subtract the T12 inclinometer reading from the T1 reading obtained in step 1 above to obtain the angle of thoracic flexion (Figures 15-11b and 15-11d).
4. Repeat either the sitting or the standing test up to six times to obtain three measurements within 5° of the mean or 10%, whichever is greater.
5. A reproducibility test is done after a positional change, having the standing individual sit or vice versa. If the initial measurements were made standing, seat the individual on a stool, record the neutral 0° position, and ask him or her to flex the thoracic spine maximally from the military brace position. The thoracic flexion sitting angle should be nearly identical to the flexion angle obtained in the erect position.
6. Consult the Abnormal Motion part of Table 15-10 to determine the whole person impairment.


c.	d.


Ankylosis
The angle of minimum kyphosis of the thoracic spine may be considered equal to the angle of anky- losis. Excessive kyphosis or thoracic lordosis is eval- uated as an impairment according to Table 15-10.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-21
5% Impairment Due to Ankylosing Spondylitis and Low Back Pain
Subject: 47-year-old man.
History: Ankylosing spondylitis.
Current Symptoms: Chronic low back pain.
Physical Examination: Attempts to extend his tho- racic spine fully demonstrate an angle of mini- mum kyphosis of 60°. With maximum flexion, T1 readings of 35°, 45°, and 55° are recorded, which are matched with T12 flexion angles of 25°, 30°, and 40°, respectively. The angles of thoracic flex- ion, derived by subtracting the T12 from the T1 angles, are 10°, 15°, and 15°. These three meas- urements meet validity criteria.
Clinical Studies: Radiographs: consistent with ankylosing spondylitis.
Diagnosis: Ankylosing spondylitis and low back pain.
Impairment Rating: According to Table 15-10, the impairment due to a 60° ankylosis (angle of mini- mum kyphosis) is 5% whole person impairment. The maximum flexion of 15° is 2% whole person impairment. The total impairment is the greater of the ankylosis and abnormal motion percentages, in this instance, 5%.
Comment: Combine this with impairments from the diagnosis table (Table 15-7).
---END EXAMPLE---
15.10b Rotation
Two-Inclinometer Technique
1. Provide information to the individual about the procedure and allow for appropriate warm-up exercises.
2. The individual should be seated or standing, whichever is more comfortable, and in a forward flexed position, with the thoracic spine in as hori- zontal a position as can be achieved (Figure 15- 12a). Locate and place horizontal skin marks over the T1 and T12 spinous processes. The trunk should be in the neutral position for rotation. The inclinometers are set to 0 by placement against a flat, horizontal table or floor if they do not auto- matically indicate gravity 0°. Place the first incli- nometer aligned vertically in the transverse (axial) plane over the T1 spinous process while holding the second over the T12 spinous process.
3. Ask the individual to rotate the trunk maximally to the left and record both angles (Figure 15-12b). Subtract the T12 angle from the T1 angle to obtain the thoracic left rotation angle. Return the trunk to the neutral position (Figure 15-12a).
4. Instruct the individual to rotate the trunk maxi- mally to the right, again recording both incli- nometer angles; subtract the T12 angle from the T1 angle to obtain the thoracic right rotation angle.
5. Repeat the procedure three to six times per side to obtain a valid set of three consecutive measure- ments. The angles of a valid set should be within 5°or 10% of the mean of the set, whichever is greater. The final impairment percent is based on the best (least impairing) angle measured.

Using the best angle of rotation and Table 15-11, determine the whole person impairment.


a. neutral position


T12


b. rotation

The figure shows the individual standing. The inclinometers are

---START EXAMPLE---
Example: An individual’s T1 rotation to the left measures 15°, 20°, and 15°. Corresponding T12
rotation angles are 5°, 10°, and 5°. The measure- ments are valid, and the left rotation angle is 10°. The whole person impairment is 2% due to loss of rotation (Table 15-11).


15.10 c Alternative Thoracic Rotation Technique
1. The individual lies supine on the exam table. Stabilize the hips and pelvis. Place the inclinome- ter across the manubrium, just below the sternal notch. The trunk should be in the neutral position and the inclinometer set at 0° gravity if it is not automatically set to 0 (Figure 15-13a).
2. Ask the individual to rotate the trunk maximally to the left and record the angle on the sternum inclinometer, making certain an assistant holds the pelvis to the table without permitting rotation. Because the angle actually measures left thora- columbar rotation, subtract 5°, the average lumbar rotation, to obtain the estimated thoracic rotation.
3.
Instruct the individual to rotate the trunk maxi- mally to the right (Figure 15-13b), again main- taining pelvic stabilization. Read the sternal inclinometer angle and subtract 5° to obtain the right thoracic rotation angle.
Ankylosis
Rotational ankylosis of the thoracic spine is gener- ally a component of a scoliosis deformity and by itself creates only limited impairment. To evaluate this type of ankylosis, use the same posture as for measuring abnormal motion in the thoracic spine, and ask the individual to achieve maximum correc- tion of the rotation deformity. Then subtract the T12 rotation angle from the T1 rotation angle and deter- mine the ankylosis angle or angle of restricted motion. Refer to the Ankylosis part of Table 15-11 to determine the impairment percent.

Figure 15-14 provides a measurement template for thoracic impairment evaluation using the ROM method.


Only one inclinometer is used. The individual is supine on the exam table with the thoracolumbar spine and pelvis in neutral position. The inclinometer is placed on the manubrium, just below the sternal notch. Stabilize the pelvis.


*If ankylosis is present, combine the ankylosis impairment with the range-of-motion impairment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

If ankyloses in several planes are present, combine the ankylosis estimates (Combined Values Chart), then combine the result with the range-of-motion impairment.


a. neutral position
b.
flexion
c.
extension


15.11 ROM: Cervical
	Spine
15.11a Flexion and Extension
Two-Inclinometer Technique
1. Provide information to the individual about the procedure, and allow for appropriate warm-up exercises.
2. Locate and place a horizontal skin mark over the T1 spinous process. With the individual seated, place the first inclinometer, aligned in the sagittal plane, over the T1 spinous process. Place the sec- ond inclinometer at the side of the face, from the corner of the eye to the ear, along a parallel line where the temple of eyeglasses would sit (Figure 15-15a). From this position, set the inclinometer to 0. This represents the 0° true neutral position. Move the second inclinometer to the calvarium, and set the head to the neutral position in both the sagittal and frontal planes, where the inclinometer again reads 0 (Figure 15-15a).


3. Ask the individual to flex maximally and record both angles. Subtract the T1 angle from the cal- varium angle to obtain the cervical flexion angle (Figure 15-15b) and record it. Return the head
to the neutral position so both inclinometers read 0° again.
4. Instruct the individual to extend the neck as far as possible, keeping the chin close to the sternum, again recording both inclinometer angles. Subtract the T1 angle from the calvarium angle to obtain the cervical extension angle (Figure 15-15c). Ask the individual to return the head to the neutral position.
5. Repeat the procedure three times. The cervical flexion and extension angles should be consis- tently measured within 5° or 10%, whichever is greater. The impairment rating is based on the greatest angle of a valid set of three consecutive measurements.
6. Using the largest valid cervical flexion and exten- sion measurements, obtain the whole person impairment rating for cervical flexion and exten- sion using Table 15-12.
7. Add the cervical flexion and extension impairment ratings and combine the sum with any ratings for diagnostic criteria (Table 15-7) and/or neural impairment.


Ankylosis
1. Note whether there is motion of the cervical spine in the sagittal plane or whether the spine is unable either to flex or extend beyond the neutral point. Determine if the ankylosis or restricted motion is in flexion or extension. If some motion is possible in the sagittal plane, ask the individual to hold the position closest to the neutral point.
2. Place the inclinometer’s base against a vertical surface to set the inclinometer to the neutral 0 position. Then place it at the side of the face, from the corner of the eye to the ear, along a parallel line where eyeglass temples would lie (Figure 15- 15b). Move the inclinometer to the calvarium and set the head to the neutral position in both the sagittal and frontal planes, where the inclinometer again reads 0 (Figure 15-15b).
3. Place the second inclinometer at T1 and record the angle. Subtract or add the T1 angle from the first-read angle to obtain the angle of ankylosis in either flexion or extension.
4. Consult the Ankylosis section of Table 15-12 to determine the whole person impairment.
5. Add the impairment percent for left rotation and right rotation. Their sum is the whole person impairment contributed by abnormal rotation of the cervical region.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example: A 55-year-old man has an extension defor- mity on attempted flexion. Inclinometer reading from the calvarium is 15° extension from the neu- tral 0° position. The T1 angle is 5° of flexion from neutral 0°. In this case, because the angles are in different directions from the neutral position, they are added, and the cervical spine thus is ankylosed at 20° extension. This is considered a 20% whole person impairment (Table 15-12).


            a. neutral position	b. left lateral bending	c. right lateral bending The individual is sitting, and the inclinometers are set to 0, with the eye-ear line as the 0 reference (see text for description)
and placed over the calvarium and T1.


15.11b Lateral Bending
Two-Inclinometer Technique
1. Provide information to the individual about the procedure and allow for appropriate warm-up exercises.
2. Place a skin mark over the T1 spinous process. With the individual in the seated position, place the first inclinometer aligned in the coronal plane over the T1 spinous process while holding the second inclinometer over the calvarium (Figure 15-16a). The head should be in the neutral posi- tion while the inclinometers are set at 0°.
3. Ask the individual to tilt the head maximally to the left and record both angles (Figure 15-16b). Subtract the T1 angle from the calvarium angle to determine the degrees of left lateral bending. Return the head to the neutral position.
4.
Instruct the individual to tilt the head maximally to the right as far as possible, recording both incli- nometer angles. Subtract the T1 angle from the calvarium angle to determine cervical right lateral bending (Figure 15-16c).
5. Repeat the above procedure at least three times. The angles measured should be within 5° or 10% of the mean of the three measurements, whichever is greater. The measurement used for impairment rating is the greatest angle of a valid set of three consecutive measurements.
6. Consult Table 15-13 to determine the whole per- son impairment related to abnormal lateral flexion of the cervical region.

Add the impairment percent from left lateral bending and right lateral bending. Their sum represents the whole person impairment related to abnormal lateral bending of the cervical region.


3. Determine whether the individual has cervical lat- eral motion or is unable to attain the neutral posi- tion. If there is motion and the individual cannot reach the neutral position, read the angle closest to neutral 0. This is the angle of ankylosis used for rating (Figure 15-16b).

Consult the Ankylosis section of Table 15-13 to determine the whole person impairment.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example: The left bending flexion angles measured from the calvarium are 20°, 35°, 35‚° and 40°. The
corresponding T1 measurements are 5°, 5°, 10°, and 10°. The true left lateral degrees of bending are 15°, 20°, 25°, and 30°. The 15° is discarded. The other three measurements fulfill the validation criteria, being more than 5° from the mean of 25°. The greatest left lateral bending angle of the three trials is 30°, and the impairment rating due to left lateral bending limitation is 1% (Table 15-13).


Ankylosis
1. Place both inclinometer bases against a desk or tabletop and adjust until they read 0°, or the neu- tral position.

2. Place one inclinometer in the frontal plane at T1 (Figure 15-16b) and the second inclinometer over the calvarium.

15.11c Cervical Rotation
Because the technique for cervical evaluation stabi- lizes the trunk in the supine position, with the shoul- ders on the table, only one inclinometer is required for measurement of rotation.
1. Provide information to the individual about the procedure, and allow for appropriate warm-up exercises. Set the inclinometer to 0° or the gravity position.
2. Have the individual lie supine on a flat exam table with shoulders exposed to permit observation of any truncal (thoracolumbar) rotation. Stand at the head of the table and place the inclinometer in the transverse plane with the base applied to the fore- head (Figure 15-17a). Record the neutral 0° posi- tion with the individual’s nose pointing to the ceiling.
3. Ask the individual to rotate the head maximally to the left, and record the cervical left rotation angle.
4. Ask the individual to rotate the head maximally to the right, and record the cervical right rotation angle (Figure 15-17b).
5. Repeat the procedure three to six times to obtain a valid set of three consecutive measurements. The left and right cervical rotation angles should be within 5° or 10% of the mean of a valid set, whichever is greater. The impairment rating is based on the greatest angle of a valid set.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example: Left cervical rotation is 15°, 35°, 55°, 60°, and 55°. The initial two measurements are dis- carded, while the others are close enough to be valid. The largest measurement, 60°, is used and corresponds to a whole person impairment esti- mate for abnormal left cervical rotation of 1% (Table 15-14).


a. neutral position


b. right rotation


Ankylosis
1. Determine whether the individual has cervical axial motion and is unable to attain the neutral position. If the individual has some motion, ask him or her to maintain the position closest to neu- tral and record the ankylosis angle closest to neu- tral (Figure 15-17).
2. Place the inclinometer on the calvarium with the cervical region in the ankylosis position, and record the ankylosis angle.
3. Consult the Ankylosis part of Table 15-14 to determine the whole person impairment.

Figure 15-18 provides a template for evaluating cer- vical impairment using the ROM method.


* If ankylosis is present, combine the ankylosis impairment with the range-of-motion impairment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604). If ankyloses in several planes are present, combine the estimates (Combined Values Chart), then combine the result with the range-of-motion impairment.


15.12 Nerve Root and/or
	Spinal Cord
When using the ROM method, it is important to con- sider any nerve root or spinal cord impairment.
Injury or illness to the cervical spine may produce nerve root compression manifested by sensory or motor loss in the upper extremities, as well as long tract signs from spinal cord compression. In the tho- racic spine, spinal cord compression or injury may produce long tract signs, but nerve roots are uncom- monly compressed. In the lumbosacral spine, spinal cord involvement is rare because the cord typically ends at L1, although nerve root compression (cauda equina or isolated root[s]) affecting the lower extremities is common. If any neural impairment is identified, proceed with the following evaluation:
1. Identify the nerve(s) involved, based on the clini- cal evaluation and the dermatome distribution charts for the lower (Figure 15-1) and upper extremity (Figure 15-2).
2. Determine the extent of any sensory and motor loss due to nerve impairment, based on Tables 15-15 and 15-16.
3. Find the maximum impairment due to nerve dys- function in Table 15-17 for the upper extremity and Table 15-18 for the lower extremity.
4. Multiply the severity of the sensory or motor deficit by the maximum value of the relevant nerve (Tables 15-17, 15-18). If there is both sen- sory and motor impairment of a nerve root, the impairment percents are combined (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine the extremity impairment. If both extremities are impaired, the impairment percent for each extremity is deter- mined, converted to whole person impairment, and the two impairment ratings combined using the Combined Values Chart.


5. Convert to whole person impairment by multiply- ing the upper extremity impairment by 0.6 and the lower extremity impairment by 0.4. To convert any regional ROM spine impairment to whole person impairment, multiply the specific spinal nerve impairment by the regional weight: 0.80 for the cer- vical spine, 0.40 for the thoracic spine, and 0.90 for the lumbosacral spine. Impairment ratings above 100% are rounded down to 100% since a whole person impairment rating cannot exceed 100%. This is described further in Section 15.14.

If there is bilateral spinal nerve impairment or spinal cord involvement, especially if in conjunction with head injury, consultation with a neurologist and/or neurosurgeon and review of the diagnostic criteria in the neurology chapter (Chapter 13) is advisable. The physician should decide whether evaluation by the spine or neurology chapter criteria is most appropriate.


* Adapted from Medical Research Council. 16


* For description of the process of determining impairment percent, see text.
* For description of the process of determining impairment percent, see text.


15.12a Examples Using the ROM Method

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-22
23% Impairment Due to Herniated Disk With Radiculopathy

Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Developed low back pain and right sciatica after lifting furniture at home. A herniated lumbar disk was treated surgically, with near complete relief of pain. About 15 months ago postoperatively, he reinjured his lumbar spine while lifting on the job. An MRI showed a recurrent herniated disk at the same level and side as before. He underwent a second diskectomy, but this time was unrelieved of pain.
Current Symptoms: Back and unilateral, radiating right leg pain, unchanged for many months.
Physical Exam: Healed scar on the back. Straight leg raising caused pain along the lateral leg and foot at 30°. The right Achilles reflex was absent. Numbness in the right S1 nerve root distribution range of motion and straight-leg-raising testing using the double-inclinometer technique resulted in the following measurements: true lumbar extension 20°; true lumbar flexion 30°; left lateral flexion 25°; right lateral flexion 20°.
The sensory changes in S1 nerve distribution were judged to be grade 4 according to Table 15-15, and weakness in the S1-innervated muscles was judged to be grade 4 according to Table 15-16.
Clinical Studies: MRI after the second injury: recur- rent herniated disk. Repeat MRI with gadolinium after surgery and failure to improve: only per- ineural scarring. Repeat routine x-rays: slight disk space narrowing at the involved level.
Diagnosis: Recurrent herniated disk with radiculopathy.
Impairment Rating: 23% impairment of the whole person.

Comment: Individual has a 12% whole person impairment according to Table 15-7, 10% due to “surgically treated disk lesion with residual, med- ically documented pain and rigidity,” added to 2% for the second operation. He has an impairment of 2% impairment due to loss of lumbar extension and 4% due to loss of flexion, with at least 45° of sacral (hip) motion (Table 15-8) and 6% loss due to extension and flexion. He has 0% impairment due to loss of left lateral lumbar flexion, 1% loss of right lateral flexion (Table 15-9), and 1% loss of lateral movement. He therefore has 7% impair- ment due to loss of lumbar motion. From Table 15-15 we see that he has a grade 4 sensory loss of
S1. Multiplying 25% (the maximum percentage in this case) by the 5% for maximum loss of S1 sen- sation from Table 15-18 results in a rating of 1% due to sensory loss. We also see that he has a grade 4 motor loss according to Table 15-16.
Multiplying 25% (the maximum in this case) by the 20% from Table 15-18 for S1 motor loss results in 5% impairment due to motor loss of S1. Combining the 1% for sensory loss and the 5% for motor loss results in a 6% impairment due to neurologic loss. Using the Combined Values Chart to combine the impairment from Table
15-7, (12%) with the impairments due to loss of motion (7%) and neurologic involvement (6%) results in a whole person impairment of 23%. In some cases, the physician may be asked to appor- tion the findings. One approach is to subtract 10% from the latest impairment rating due to the first injury, assuming it was a DRE III without ROM data after the first operation and the radiculopathy had resolved after the first surgery.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-23
7% Impairment Due to Ankylosing Spondylitis

Subject: 56-year-old man.
History: Individual with known ankylosing spondylitis has become unable to work because of pain and is considering retirement, depending on his impairment rating.
Current Symptoms: Moderate pain; cannot straighten up completely.
Physical Exam: Measurement of the motion and ankylosis in the thoracic spine demonstrates an angle of minimum kyphosis of 60°. With maxi- mum flexion, T1 readings of 35°, 45°, and 55° are recorded, which are matched with T12 flexion angles of 25°, 30°, and 40°, respectively. The angles of thoracic flexion, which are derived by subtracting the T1 angles from the T12 angles, are 10°, 15°, and 15°. These meet validity criteria. T1
rotation to the right measures 15°, 20°, and 15°. Corresponding T12 rotation angles measure 5°, 10°, and 5°. The measurements are valid, and the left rotation angle is 10°. The right thoracic rota- tion angles are the same as the right.
Diagnosis: Ankylosing spondylitis.
Impairment Rating: 7% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: According to Table 15-10, the impair- ment due to ankylosis (angle of minimum kypho- sis) of 60° is 5% of the whole person and, considering maximum flexion, the impairment due to abnormal motion of 15° is 2%. The total impairment is the greater of the ankylosis and abnormal motion percentages, in this instance, 5%. The impairment due to loss of right thoracic rotation is, according to Table 15-11, 1%.
Impairment due to loss of left thoracic rotation is the same. Adding these impairments results in a whole person impairment of 7%. Because there has been no injury or surgery, the individual does not meet any of the other diagnostic criteria in Table 15-7, and there is no neurologic involve- ment, the whole person impairment is derived solely from the loss of motion and is 7%. If there was loss of motion in any other spinal region, each region would be rated separately and the rat- ings combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-24
23% Impairment Due to Compression Fractures


Subject: 54-year-old woman.
History: Fell from a ladder and sustained burst frac- tures of L2 with loss of height of 55% and L3 with loss of height of 20%. Treated with bracing and the fractures healed. Returned to work as a customer service agent 6 months after the injury.
Current Symptoms: No neurologic findings, but she has back pain after heavy activity.
Physical Exam: Mild tenderness to palpation at the fracture site. Neurologic examination is negative. Straight leg raising is negative. True lumbar extension is 10°, flexion is 30°, and left and right lateral bending are each 10°. There is normal hip motion.
Clinical Studies: Repeat x-rays of the area: healed fractures with persistent loss of height of greater than 50% at L2 and 20% at L3.
Diagnosis: Compression fractures L2 and L3.
Impairment Rating: 23% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Injuries at two vertebrae within the same region, with a 55% compression of L2, according to Table 15-7, results in an impairment of 7%. The compression fracture of L3 results in an impair- ment of 5%, according to Table 15-7. The instruc- tions are to combine these two impairment ratings; doing so results in an impairment rating of 12%.
The woman has true lumbar extension of 10° which, according to Table 15-8, results in an impairment of 5%, a lumbar flexion of 30°, which results in an impairment of 4% (Table 15-8), and left and right lateral bending of 10°, which results in an impairment of 2% for each (Table 15-9).
Adding these four impairments due to loss of motion results in an impairment of 13%.
Combining the impairment of 12% from Table 15-7 and the 13% from Tables 15-8 and 15-9 results in a whole person impairment of 23%.
---END EXAMPLE---

15.13 Criteria for
Converting Whole Person Impairment to Regional Spine
	Impairment
In some instances, the evaluator may be asked to express an impairment rating in terms of the involved spine region rather than the whole person. This is done by dividing the whole person impairment estimate by the percent of spine function that has been assigned to that region. Under the DRE method, a whole person estimate being converted to a regional estimate would be divided by 0.35 for the cervical spine, 0.20 for the


thoracic spine, and 0.75 for the lumbar and sacral spines. Under the ROM method, a whole person esti- mate being converted to a regional estimate should be divided by 0.80 for the cervical spine, 0.40 for the tho- racic spine, or 0.90 for the lumbosacral spine (Figure 15-19). For example, a 24-year-old female office worker sustained a cervical injury that, after it was healed and stable, resulted in a whole body impair- ment, estimated by the DRE method, of 20%.
Dividing the 20% by 0.35 results in 57% impairment of the cervical spine. An individual with multiple lum- bar compression fractures was rated 25% whole body impairment by the ROM method. To obtain an esti- mate of lumbar spine impairment, the physician should divide the 25% by 0.9, resulting in a 27.7% rounded up to 28% lumbar spine impairment. Any values that exceed 100% are rounded down to 100% regional impairment.


15.14 The Pelvis
Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Pelvic Injury
The pelvis is composed bilaterally of three bones: the ilium, the ischium, and the pubis, forming a ringlike structure. Each ilium is attached to the sacrum via the sacroiliac synchondrosis. The pelvis, including the symphysis pubis, assists in transfer
of body weight to the lower extremities. In females, the pelvic structure and function are also of para- mount importance in pregnancy and delivery.


The whole spine divided into regions indicating the maximum whole person impairment represented by a total impairment of one region of the spine. Lumbar 90%, thoracic 40%, cervical 80%.


Pelvic disorders are evaluated using Table 15-19. When necessary, these disorders may be combined with impairment ratings from either the DRE or ROM methods for spine impairment.


The impairment estimate for hemipelvectomy is 50% of the whole person (Table 17-32).

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 15-25
5% Impairment Due to Pelvic Stress Fracture


Subject: 22-year-old man.
History: Military intensive training involving run- ning with a backpack of 40 lbs over extended time and distance. Difficulty standing up because of pain in the pelvis and in the right upper thigh.
Pain was enhanced by walking and running. Felt challenged not to report the pain, which he felt while jumping over a boulder 2 weeks prior to the time of the medical exam. The pain was intensi- fied with further running.
Current Symptoms: Pain in the right groin and medial upper thigh aggravated by standing and walking; improved in the supine position.
Physical Exam: Acute tenderness to palpation and pressure on the right pubic bone and the right adductor and hamstrings origin at the inferior ischiopubic junction.
Clinical Studies: Pelvic x-rays: transverse fissure in the upper border of the obturator foramen; there is already a callus development in the area.
Diagnosis: Stress fracture at the right ischiopubic junction.
Impairment Rating: 5% whole person impairment due to delayed union with deformity and residual signs after achieving MMI.
Comment: The callus formation continued and grew, producing a delayed union. He continued to have right groin and medial upper thigh pain, increasing with walking and running, and stabiliz- ing after 9 months. Stress fractures of the pelvis, especially of the inferior branch of the pubic bone, need to be investigated and treated in a timely manner. Delay in investigation and diagno- sis may result in massive callus formation and abnormal union, as well as continued pain, espe- cially with standing and running.
---END EXAMPLE---

15.15 Spine Evaluation
	Summary
See Table 15-20 for a spine evaluation summary form.






================================================================================
Chapter 16: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Upper Extremities
16.1 Principles of Assessment
16.2 Amputations
16.3 Sensory Impairment Due to Digital Nerve Lesions
16.4 Evaluating Abnormal Motion
16.5 Impairment of the Upper Extremities Due to Peripheral Nerve Disorders
16.6 Impairment of the Upper Extremities Due to Vascular Disorders
16.7 Impairment of the Upper Extremities Due to Other Disorders
16.8 Strength Evaluation
16.9 Summary of Steps for Evaluating Impairments of the Upper Extremity
16.10 Clinical Examples
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating perma- nent impairments due to anatomic impairments of the hand and the upper extremity. The methods discussed in this chapter for evaluation of upper extremity impairment due to amputation, sensory loss, and abnormal motion or ankylosis were based on A. B. Swanson’s work and adapted from the fourth edition and updated with input from many of the specialty societies listed in the preface.

The following revisions have been made for the fifth edition: (1) basic principles of assessment have been clarified, (2) updates of the latest scientific informa- tion in assessment of upper extremity impairments have been provided, (3) measurement of range of motion of the fingers has been clarified to also detect limited motion due to limited excursion of tendons,
(4) impairment determination for nerve entrapment syndromes has been clarified, (5) the criteria for diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome are discussed and consistent throughout the book,
(6) criteria for diagnosis and rating of carpal instabil- ity have been clarified, and (7) criteria for diagnosis and rating of weakness not due to other ratable con- ditions have been clarified.


433


16.1 Principles of
	Assessment
16.1 a Principles of Impairment Evaluation Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for per- forming and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

Methods for evaluating impairments of the upper extremities may be described as having anatomic, cosmetic, or functional bases. The physical evalua- tion determines the anatomic impairment and is based on the history and a detailed examination of the individual and the upper extremity(ies). The cos- metic evaluation concerns both the individual’s and society’s reaction to the individual’s condition. The functional evaluation measures the individual’s motor performance of activities of daily living or of a specific task within a set time frame. Functional studies are increasingly sophisticated and can com- plement the evaluation process. However, the neces- sary level of standardization in precision and reproducibility to assess function has not yet been developed to derive a numeric impairment rating.
Therefore, evaluation of anatomic impairment forms the basis for upper extremity assessment. The impairment ratings originally developed and retained in this chapter were developed to reflect the degree of impairment and its impact on the ability of the individual to perform activities of daily living.


The most practical and useful approach to evaluating impairment of a digit is to compare the current loss of function with the loss resulting from amputation. Total loss of motion and sensibility of a digit, or ankylosis with severe malposition that renders the digit essentially useless, is considered to be about the same as amputation of the part. Ankylosis of a digit or joint in the optimal functional position is given the least motion impairment of the part. Impairment due to total transverse sensory loss of a digit corresponds to 50% of the amputation impairment at the same length or level of involvement (Figures 16-6 and
16-7). Impairment values derived from amputation, loss of motion or ankylosis, and sensibility loss are combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).


16.1 b Impairment Evaluation: Documentation and Recording
The medical evaluation is the basis for determination of permanent anatomic impairment of the upper extremities. It must be accurate, objective, and well documented. Evaluation of the upper extremities requires a sound knowledge of the normal functional anatomy and would be incomplete without assess- ment of the general condition of the whole person.
It must be thorough and should include several ele- ments: status of activities of daily living; careful observations; both local and general physical exami- nations; appropriate imaging evaluation; laboratory tests; and, preferably, a photographic record.


The Upper Extremities	435

An impairment evaluation is based on the examiner’s actual findings. A prior injury or illness is considered during assessment of causation and apportionment, as discussed in Chapters 1 and 2. Impairment ratings in this chapter have not been adjusted for hand domi- nance, as is done in Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System. Hand dominance is dif- ficult to objectively measure and is not accounted for in these impairment ratings. Hand dominance may be right or left and may be marked or slight, or the individual may be completely ambidextrous. Hand dominance should be considered in the determina- tion of disability. If the examiner believes that hand dominance has a significant impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living, this can be dis- cussed in the impairment evaluation report along with the resulting impairment rating. Hand domi- nance may, of course, be significant when assessing disability.


A complete and detailed examination of the upper extremities is necessary for accurate impairment evaluation. One method for recording results from a systematic examination is the use of the Upper Extremity Impairment Evaluation Record (Figures 16-1a and 16-1b). Part 1 of the evaluation record addresses the hand region and lists impairments due to abnormal motion or ankylosis, amputation, and sensory loss resulting from digital nerve lesions and to other disorders. Part 2 is designed to assist impair- ment evaluation of the wrist, elbow, and shoulder due to abnormal motion or ankylosis, amputation, and “other” disorders, as well as those related to the peripheral nerve system, peripheral vascular system, and other disorders not included in regional impair- ments (eg, grip strength). Table 16-1 gives conver- sions from digit to hand impairment, and Table 16-2 gives those from hand to upper extremity impair- ment. Regional impairments resulting from the hand, wrist, elbow, and shoulder regions are combined to provide the upper extremity impairment (see Section 1.4, Philosophy and Use of the Combined Values Chart, and the Combined Values Chart, p. 604). The upper extremity impairment is then converted to a whole person impairment by means of Table 16-3.
When to add as opposed to combine impairments is discussed in Sections 16.1c and 16.1d and noted in Figure 16-1.

The impairment evaluation record form is designed for use with unilateral upper extremity impairments. Cases of bilateral involvement require completion of a separate record form for each upper extremity. The whole person impairment values derived for each upper extremity are then combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to derive the total whole person impairment. If the total combined whole person impairment does not seem to ade- quately reflect the actual extent of alteration in the individual’s ability to perform activities of daily living, this should be noted.


436


• Combined Values Chart (p. 604).	*Use Table 16-1 (digits to hand).	†Use Table 16-2 (hand to upper extremity).	§Use Table 16-3. Courtesy of G. de Groot Swanson, MD, Grand Rapids, Michigan.


437


• Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
If both limbs are involved, calculate the whole person impairment for each on a separate chart and combine the percents (Combined Values Chart).


* See Table 16-2 for converting hand impairment to upper extremity impairment.

16.1c Combining Impairment Ratings The method for combining various impairments is based on the principle that a second and each suc- ceeding impairment do not apply to the whole unit (eg, whole finger) but only to the part or value that remains (eg, proximal phalanx) after the preceding impairment (eg, amputation through the proximal interphalangeal joint) has been applied.

When a given unit has more than one type of impairment (eg, abnormal motion, sensory loss, and partial amputation of a finger), the various impairments are combined to determine the total
impairment of the unit (eg, finger) before conversion to the next larger unit (eg, hand). Similarly, multiple regional impairments, such as those of the hand, wrist, elbow, and shoulder, are first expressed indi- vidually as upper extremity impairments and then combined to determine the total upper extremity impairment. The latter is finally converted to whole person impairment (Table 16-3). The combined value determination is based on the following formula: A% + B% (100% – A%) = the combined value of A% and B%.

The Combined Values Chart (p. 604) is used to deter- mine the combined value of two impairment percent- ages. All percentages being combined must be expressed on a common denominator or same unit relative value. If three or more values are to be com- bined, the two lowest values are first selected and their combined value is found. The combined value and the third value are then combined to give the total value. This procedure can be repeated indefi- nitely, with the value obtained in each case being a combination of all the previous values.


* Consult Table 16-3 to convert upper extremity impairment to whole person impairment.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-1
Exam: An index finger has an amputation at the dis- tal interphalangeal (DIP) joint (45% digit impair- ment, Table 16-4) and 90° flexion ankylosis at the PIP joint (75% digit impairment, Figure 16-23).
Analysis: The combined impairment is found as fol- lows: 45% + 75% (100% – 45%) = 45% + 41% =
86% digit impairment. This number may be found using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) at the intersection of the row of the chart for 75% and the column indicated by 45% at the bottom of the chart.
Impairment Rating: Since the index finger repre- sents 20% of the hand, as listed in Table 16-1, the above impairment would represent 20% ? 86% impairment of the hand, or 17% (Table 16-1).


16.1 d Principles for Adding Impairment Values
When the components of a unit have been assigned a value relative to the whole unit on the same 100% scale, the impairment rating values are added rather than combined. Impairment ratings in the hand are added only in the following situations:


1. The total hand impairment rating is determined by adding the hand impairment values contributed by each digit. The hand unit value (100%) is the sum of its component digit values: 40% for the thumb and 20% for the index, 20% for the middle, 10% for the ring, and 10% for the little fingers (Tables 16-1 and 16-4).
2. As shown in Table 16-4, thumb amputations prox- imal to the MP joint level are expressed in terms of impairment of the upper extremity and receive greater values (37% to 38%, according to level) than amputation of the thumb at the MP joint level (36%). When other hand impairments are present, the total hand impairment value is con- verted to impairment of the upper extremity and then added directly to the upper extremity impair- ment value resulting from amputation of the thumb ray.


Compiled by G. de Groot Swanson, MD, Grand Rapids, Mich.


3. The thumb ray motion impairment value is deter- mined by adding the motion impairment values contributed by each joint. The thumb functional unit (100%) is the sum of its component joint val- ues: carpometacarpal, 75%; metacarpophalangeal (MP), 10%; and interphalangeal (IP), 15%. However, the finger joint impairment ratings for loss of motion are not added, but combined, because their individual values (MP, 100%; PIP, 80%; DIP, 45%) are not assigned on a 100% finger unit scale.


4. For each unit of motion, the motion impairment value is found by adding together the two impair- ment values contributed by its components, based on the formula A% = E% + F%. Similarly, for each joint, the total motion impairment rating is found by adding the impairment values con- tributed by each unit of motion. For example, the upper extremity impairment due to abnormal elbow motion is found by adding the impairments from the flexion + extension (IE% + IF%) unit to those from the pronation + supination (IP% + IS%) unit, or total motion impairment equals (IF% + IE%) + (IP% + IS%).
5. In Section 16.7, Impairment of the Upper Extremities Due to Other Disorders, the relative value of each joint has been assigned on a 100% digit unit scale: thumb CMC 60%, MP 15%, and IP 25%; and finger MP 50%, PIP 30%, and DIP 20% (Table 16-18). However, the relative value scale used in Table 16-18 is not the same as that assigned for amputations (Table 16-4) and range of motion. Therefore, if more than one joint of a specific digit is affected by other disorders, the impairments are added directly together only in the absence of amputation and presence of full motion of each joint involved. Otherwise, they are combined.

All other upper extremity impairment ratings are combined.

It should be noted that, in terms of upper extremity impairment, the functional unit values for the shoul- der (60%), elbow (70%), wrist (60%), and digital joints differ from those assigned for amputation at similar levels (Tables 16-4 and 16-18 and Section 16.4).


16.2 b Amputation Impairment: Levels Proximal to Digits
The amputation impairment ratings increase with progressively shorter stumps and reach 70% of the whole person for a scapulothoracic (forequarter) amputation, as illustrated in Figure 16-2 and noted in Table 16-4. Amputations through the humerus at or proximal to the deltoid tubercle level (approximately the axillary fold) correspond to 100% loss of the limb, or 60% impairment of the whole person.
Amputations occurring between a level just distal to the deltoid tubercle and the bicipital tuberosity


16.2  Amputations
16.2 a General Principles
Important factors to consider in evaluating amputa- tions include not only the level of occurrence but also the presence of associated problems relating to the condition of the residual stump (Section 16.2d), to regional or central pain syndromes, and to restric- tion or loss of motion of existing proximal joints (Section 16.4).


The upper limb is considered as a unit of the whole person and is divided into shoulder, elbow, wrist, and hand regions. The hand is further separated into dig- its and their parts. From distally to proximally, each anatomic unit is given a relative value to the next larger unit and, eventually, the whole person. By multiplying the appropriate percent, impairment of each unit can be converted sequentially to hand, upper extremity, and whole person impairment as indicated in Tables 16-1, 16-2, 16-3, and 16-4 and
Figures 16-2 and 16-3.


Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.


Transmetacarpophalangeal amputation of all digits represents 100% hand impairment

MP = metacarpophalangeal PIP = proximal interphalangeal DIP = distal interphalangeal

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.


(insertion of the biceps brachii on the radius) consti- tute a 95% impairment of the upper extremity, or 57% impairment of the whole person. Amputations occurring between a level just distal to the bicipital tuberosity and the metacarpophalangeal joints of all digits are estimated to represent 94% to 90% impair- ment of the upper extremity (56% to 54% of the whole person) according to the functional possibili- ties afforded by either prosthetic or surgical options (eg, Krukenberg procedure), or simply by the actual length of the residual stump. The evaluator must use clinical judgment to select the appropriate values.


16.2 c Amputation Impairment: Digital Levels
Principles
Amputation of all digits (fingers and thumb) through the metacarpophalangeal joints removes the most essential parts of the hand and is considered 100% impairment of the hand, or 90% impairment of the

upper extremity. Since loss of the entire upper extremity represents 60% impairment of the whole person, this corresponds to 90% ? 60%, or 54% impairment of the whole person (Figures 16-2 and 16-3 and Tables 16-1 through 16-4).

Amputation through each joint level of a digit is given a relative value of loss to the entire digit as fol- lows: digit metacarpophalangeal (MP) joint, 100%; thumb interphalangeal (IP) joint, 50%; finger proxi- mal interphalangeal (PIP) joint, 80%; and finger dis- tal interphalangeal (DIP) joint, 45% (Figures 16-3, 16-4, and 16-5; Table 16-4). Digit impairment values for amputation at various levels are shown in Figures 16-4 (thumb) and 16-5 (fingers). Joints should be named rather than numbered.

Amputations of the thumb at levels proximal to the metacarpophalangeal joint are considered to provide a greater severity of impairment than amputation at the MP joint level. Amputation through the thumb MP joint represents a 36% impairment of the upper extremity. Amputation through the distal third of the first metacarpal receives 37% impairment of the upper extremity, and amputation at or near the first carpometacarpal joint is given 38% impairment of the upper extremity (Table 16-4).

The digits represent five coordinated units into which hand function is unequally divided. Each digit is given a relative value to the entire hand as follows: thumb, 40%; index and middle fingers, 20% each; and ring and little fingers, 10% each (Figure 16-3;
Tables 16-1 and 16-4). To avoid confusion, digits are named rather than numbered.

By multiplying the appropriate percentages, the impairment rating for each digit, or portion thereof, is converted to an impairment rating of the larger units, the hand, the upper extremity, and, finally, the whole person (Tables 16-1 through 16-4).


Tip


IP


MP

Thumb amputation levels
0  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100


Tip


DIP


PIP

Finger amputation levels
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 %


Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the	MP
hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-2

Exam: Amputation through the PIP joint of the index finger.
Analysis: A PIP joint amputation represents 80% finger impairment. The relative index finger value to the hand is 20%; therefore, this amputation rep- resents 80% ? 20%, or 16% hand impairment (Table 16-1). The relative hand value to the upper extremity is 90%; 16% hand impairment corre- sponds to 16% ? 90%, or 14% upper extremity
impairment (Table 16-2).
Impairment Rating: The relative upper extremity value to the whole person is 60%; a 14% upper extremity impairment equals 14% ? 60%, or 8% whole person impairment (Table 16-3).

Impairment Rating for Digit Amputation
1. Determine the length of the digit remaining after amputation and evaluate the digit impairment according to Figure 16-4 for the thumb and Figure 16-5 for the fingers. Amputations through the metacarpal are considered to be 100% impairment of the finger. Amputations of the thumb through the first metacarpal receive additional considera- tion (see 4. below).
2. If a digit has more than one type of impairment (eg, sensory, motion, amputation), the total digit impairment rating is obtained by combining the various digit impairment ratings. The total digit impairment rating is then converted to a hand impairment (Table 16-1).
3.
When multiple digits are involved, the hand impairment values for each digit are added directly to obtain the total hand impairment. The total hand impairment is multiplied by 90% to obtain the upper extremity impairment (Table
16-2) and then by 60% to obtain impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3).
4. As shown on Table 16-4, thumb amputations proximal to the MP joint level are expressed in terms of impairment of the upper extremity and receive greater values (37% to 38%, according to level) than amputation of the thumb at the MP joint level (36%). When other hand impairments are present, the total hand impairment value is converted to impairment of the upper extremity and then added directly to the upper extremity impairment value resulting from amputation of the thumb ray.
5. Convert the hand impairment rating to the upper extremity and whole person impairment ratings (Tables 16-2 and 16-3).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-3

Exam: Thumb amputation through the proximal metaphysis of the proximal phalanx.
Analysis: According to Figure 16-4, a proximal metaphysis thumb amputation receives a 90% digit impairment rating. Since the relative value of the thumb to the hand is 40% (Figure 16-3 and Table 16-1), the thumb amputation converts to 36% hand impairment. Using Table 16-2, the
36% hand impairment converts to 32% upper extremity impairment.
Impairment Rating: According to Table 16-3, the 32% upper extremity impairment converts to 19% impairment of the whole person.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-4

Exam: Amputation of the thumb at the MP joint with amputation through the DIP joint of the index finger.
Analysis: Amputation of the thumb at the MP joint (100% ? 40% = 40% hand impairment) with amputation through the DIP joint of the index fin- ger (45% ? 20% = 9% hand impairment) corre-
sponds to 40% + 9%, or 49% hand impairment. This is equivalent to 49% ? 90%, or 44% impair- ment of the upper extremity (Table 16-2).
Impairment Rating: The impairment of the whole person is 44% ? 60%, or 26% (Table 16-3).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-5

Exam: Thumb ray amputation at the CMC joint with amputation of the index finger at the MP joint.
Analysis: Thumb amputation at the CMC joint equals 38% impairment of the upper extremity (Table 16-4). Amputation of the index finger at the MP joint equals 20% hand impairment (Table 16-4 and Figure 16-3), or 18% impairment of the upper extremity (Table 16-2). The upper extremity impairment values of 38% for the thumb and 18% for the index finger are added directly together, or equal 56%.
Impairment Rating: A 56% impairment of the upper extremity converts to a 34% impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3).
16.2
d Conditions Associated With Amputation
Evaluation of the residual stump must assess the status of soft tissue coverage, of the peripheral nerve and vascular systems, and of the bone itself. Unstable soft tissue coverage or painful scars are evaluated accord- ing to Chapter 8, The Skin. Peripheral nerve prob- lems, such as associated neuromas and complex regional pain syndromes, are assessed according to Section 16.5, Impairment of the Upper Extremities Due to Peripheral Nerve Disorders, or Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System. Phantom pain is of neurogenic or central origin and is discussed in Chapter 18, Pain. Impairments resulting from peripheral vascular disorders are evaluated according to Section 16.6; Chapter 4, The Cardiovascular System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries; or Chapter
13. Bone overgrowth rarely occurs in other than the long bones of juvenile amputees and receives special consideration according to the problems presented. Any impairment resulting from lost or restricted motion of proximal joints is evaluated according to Section 16.4, Evaluating Abnormal Motion.

Impairments related to any of the above associated conditions are rated separately in terms of upper extremity impairment and then combined with the total upper extremity impairment due to amputation.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-6


Exam: Forearm amputation stump at a level just dis- tal to the bicipital tubercle of the radius.
Current Symptoms: Unable to fit elbow prosthesis due to severely restricted elbow motion. Refused surgical shortening of the residual stump.
Analysis: Amputation of the forearm just distal to the bicipital tuberosity corresponds to a 94% impairment of the upper extremity (Table 16-4 and Figure 16-2). The upper extremity impair- ment rating for decreased elbow motion was calculated as 50%.


Impairment Rating: Use the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to combine the amputation impair- ment (94%) with the elbow motion impairment (50%) to obtain the total upper extremity impair- ment of 97%. Convert the 97% upper extremity impairment to 58% impairment of the whole per- son (Table 16-3).


16.3 Sensory
Impairment Due to Digital Nerve
	Lesions
It has been said that “the hand without feeling is blind.” The important difference between “sensation” and “sensibility” was clearly defined by George Omer in 1974. “Sensation is the acceptance and acti- vation of impulses in the afferent nerve fibers of the nervous system.	Sensibility is the conscious
appreciation and interpretation of the stimulus that produced sensation.” The palmar surfaces of the dig- its have a unique sensibility or capacity for precise interpretation of sensation because of their dense pop- ulation of specialized receptor organs and free nerve endings. The impairment evaluation of sensibility in the hand, therefore, deserves special attention.

This section addresses the impairment evaluation of sensibility losses in the digits associated with lesions of digital nerves. Sensibility impairment in the hand associated with lesions proximal to digital nerves, painful conditions such as neuromas, and complex regional pain syndromes are considered in Section
16.5 and Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System. Impairment due to neuromas of digital nerves is discussed in Section 16.3c.
16.3
a Clinical Evaluation
Evaluation of sensory function in the hand considers all modalities of sensibility, including perception of pain, warmth, cold, and touch-pressure, as well as vibration.

The grading system introduced by the Nerve Injuries Committee of the British Medical Research Council in 1954 describes six levels of sensory recovery after nerve injury. These levels are still used today to describe sensory changes:

S0	Absent sensibility
S1	Recovery of deep cutaneous pain and pressure sensibility (protective sensibility absent)
S2	Return of some degree of superficial cutaneous pain and tactile sensibility, and temperature appreciation (protective sensibility decreased)
S3	Return of superficial cutaneous pain and tactile sensibility (light touch diminished)
S3+ Some recovery of two-point discrimination S4	Complete sensory recovery

Generally, if an individual has some light touch recognition, the sensory submodalities are assumed to be present.

All clinical tests used to examine the degree of func- tional loss of sensibility are related to cutaneous touch-pressure sensation. At present, the two-point test for fine discrimination sensibility is most widely used, followed by the monofilament touch-pressure threshold test. The pinprick test can be useful to determine whether pain protective sensation is intact and to identify discrepancies between dermatomal findings and reported symptoms. More accurate assessment is obtained by using the sharp and dull sides of the pin at random. Vibration testing has yet to be associated with functional levels of sensibility.


The Ninhydrin sweat test and wrinkle test may be useful in documenting interruption of digital nerves, especially where questions exist concerning consis- tency between reported symptoms and neurologic findings. However, these tests have limitations in evaluating a recovering or compressed nerve, because they do not correlate with the presence or absence of sensibility in a regenerating nerve. The Semmes-Weinstein monofilament pressure aesthe- siometer measures light-touch and deep-pressure thresholds with sufficient accuracy to quantify returning sensibility levels long before two-point dis- crimination is measurable. The moving two-point discrimination test may be useful in evaluating recovering nerve function because response to this stimulus returns before response to a static two-point stimulus. Functional isolation of the finger, as noted in the blindfolded picking-up test, can help deter- mine the presence or absence of any useful sensibility in the digit.

The patterns of nerve loss and recovery seen in neu- ropathy or neuritis from disease or nerve compres- sion are different from those following nerve lacerations. Within the limits of current instruments, two-point discrimination tests have been normal, whereas both the Semmes-Weinstein pressure aes- thesiometer and nerve conduction studies have been abnormal in both clinical and induced neuropathies. Two-point discrimination has its widest application for individuals who have sustained nerve lacerations, in whom presence of two-point discrimination usu- ally indicates significant return of function.

The classic Weber static two-point discrimination test is most valuable. Moberg originally described the use of a paper clip opened and bent into a caliper. The Disk-Criminator, DeMayo 2-Point Discrimination Device, and Boley Gauge are some of the currently available testing instruments. Testing is started dis- tally and proceeds proximally. The distance between the tips of the instrument is set first at 5 mm. As the individual being tested closes his or her eyes, the tips of the testing device are applied lightly to the sides of the pulp of the distal segment of the digit in a random sequence, in a longitudinal orientation. Because it is light-touch discrimination that is being tested, the pressure applied should be very light and must not produce a point of blanching or skin indentation. The interval between applications should be no less than 3 to 5 seconds. A series of touches with one or two

points is made, and the individual immediately indi- cates whether one or two points are felt. Two out of three responses must be accurate for scoring. The dis- tance between the ends is progressively increased until the required accurate responses are elicited, at which time the distance is recorded.

Sensibility assessment is one of the most challenging tasks in impairment evaluation. The subjective nature of sensibility testing can relate to a number of vari- ables involving the testing environment, the individ- ual being tested, the test instruments and methods of administration, and the examiner. Tests should be administered in a quiet environment void of extrane- ous noises that distract the individual and the tester. Examinee-related variables can include attitude, con- centration, anxiety, and the like. Abnormal skin tex- ture, such as calluses, also influences the test results. Instrument-related variables include manufacturing quality control, readjustment of calibration as needed over time, and the weight of various instruments.
Important method-related variables include rate and duration of stimulus application, the amount of pres- sure exerted on the skin, and whether the stimulus is moving or constant. Instruments designed to control the force and velocity of two-point or monofilament application and of other stimuli are not yet available. The examiner’s experience, attention to detail, and adherence to methods of administration can mini- mize the effects of the above variables.


16.3 b Digital Nerve Sensory Impairment Evaluation: Principles
Only unequivocal and permanent sensory deficits are given permanent impairment ratings. Sensory impairment is rated according to the sensory quality and the distribution of the sensory loss.

The sensory quality is based on the results of the
two-point discrimination test carried out over the dis- tal palmar area of the digit, or on the most distal part of the stump in the presence of a partial amputation. Sensibility defects on the dorsal surfaces of the digits are not considered impairing. The sensory quality impairment is classified according to Table 16-5.
In total sensory losses (>15 mm), the response to touch, pinprick, pressure, and vibratory stimuli is absent. In partial sensory losses (7-15 mm), there is poor localization and abnormal response to the sensory stimuli.


Total transverse sensory loss impairments correspond to 50% of amputation values.


The sensory quality impairment ratings derived from Table 16-5 are to be used only for impairment due to lesions of digital nerves. They cannot be used in Table 16-10 as a substitute for selecting the grade of severity of sensory deficits or pain resulting from peripheral nerve disorders. Values from Table 16-5 are not to be used as severity index multipliers in


Tip


IP


MP

Digit impairment %
Amputation
0  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100


0  5  10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Total transverse sensory loss

conjunction with assessment of individual spinal

nerves (Table 16-13), brachial plexus (Table 16-14), or major peripheral nerves (Table 16-15).

The distribution, or area, of sensory loss is deter- mined by the level of involvement (percentage of digit length affected) of either both digital nerves (transverse sensory loss) or one digital nerve on either the radial or ulnar side of the digit (longitudi- nal sensory loss). The percentage of digit length involved is derived from the top scale of Figure 16-6 for the thumb and of Figure 16-7 for the fingers.
Total transverse sensory loss represents 100% sen- sory loss (> 15 mm) involving both digital nerves and

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.

Total transverse sensory loss impairments correspond to 50% of amputation values.

Digit impairment %
Amputation

receives 50% of the digit amputation impairment value for the corresponding level (Figures 16-6 and 16-7, bottom scale, and Tables 16-6 and 16-7).

Partial transverse sensory loss represents 50% sen- sory loss (7-15 mm) involving both digital nerves and receives 25% of the digit amputation impairment value for the corresponding digit length percentage (Tables 16-6 and 16-7).

Tip


DIP


PIP


MP

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100


0  5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Total transverse sensory loss


Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.


From Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G, Hagert CG. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Mackin EJ, Callahan AD, eds. Rehabilitation of the Hand: Surgery and Therapy. Fourth ed. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby; 1995:1858.

From Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G, Hagert CG. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Mackin EJ, Callahan AD, eds. Rehabilitation of the Hand: Surgery and Therapy. Fourth ed. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby; 1995:1858.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-7
Exam: Total transverse sensory loss (both digital nerves) from the level of the IP joint of the thumb (50% length) distally.
Analysis: Corresponds to 50% (sensory impairment)
? 50% (thumb length) = 25% digit impairment (Figure 16-6 and Table 16-6).
Impairment Rating: 25% thumb impairment corre- sponds to 10% hand impairment (Table 16-2).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-8
Exam: Partial transverse sensory loss (both digital nerves) from the level of the index PIP joint (80% length) distally.
Analysis: 25% (sensory impairment) ? 80% (digit length) = 20% digit impairment (Figure 16-7 and Table 16-7).
Impairment Rating: 20% index impairment corre- sponds to 4% hand impairment (Table 16-2).

Longitudinal sensory loss impairments are based on the relative importance of the side of the digit for sensory function as follows: thumb and little finger, radial side 40% and ulnar side 60%; index, middle, and ring fingers, radial side 60% and ulnar side 40%. The surfaces used for opposition in various pinch functions and the ulnar aspect of the border finger are rated more highly. If the little finger has been amputated, the relative value of the ulnar side of the ring finger becomes 60% and that of the radial side, 40%. The digit impairment values are calculated similarly as above based on the sensory quality and distribution of the sensory loss.

For ease of determination, digit impairment values for total transverse and longitudinal and partial trans- verse and longitudinal sensory losses were calculated according to the percentage of digit length involved and are presented in table form. Consult Table 16-6 for the thumb and little finger and Table 16-7 for the index, middle, and ring fingers. Corresponding hand impairment values can be derived from Table 16-1, as shown in Figure 16-8, for total sensory losses involving 100% of the digit length.


100% Digit Length. These values were converted to hand impairment values (Figure 16-8) and upper extremity impairment values (Table 16-15).

If both digital nerves are involved in the same digit, the sensory impairments relating to the ulnar and radial palmar nerves are added. Similarly, the per- centage of digit impairment due to neuroma forma- tion along one digital nerve is added to any sensory deficit impairment due to the contralateral nerve.
However, if other impairments of the same digit are present (eg, from amputation, decreased motion, or other disorders), their percentages are combined with the percentage due to sensory loss.


Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.


Relatively small impairment values are given for sen- sory deficits in areas other than the palmar surfaces of the digits. In the hand region, up to 5% impair- ment of the hand (5% impairment of the upper extremity) may be given for loss of sensibility in ter- ritories innervated by the palmar or dorsal ulnar cuta- neous nerve, median palmar cutaneous nerve, or superficial radial nerve (Figure 16-48).


16.3 c Rating Impairment Due to Digital Neuromas
The grade of severity of pain and decreased function associated with neuromas of the digital nerves is rated according to Table 16-10a. The severity grade percentage is multiplied by the maximum impair- ment value of the digital nerve involved (see Table 16-10b, Procedure). The maximum digit impairment values for each digital nerve are found in Table 16-6 for the thumb and little finger and Table 16-7 for the index, middle, and ring fingers under the columns headed Longitudinal Loss, Total (Ulnar or Radial),
16.3
d Digital Nerve Sensory Impairment Determination Method
1. Use the two-point discrimination test to identify the sensory quality, or type of sensory loss, as total (> 15 mm) or partial (7 through 15 mm) (Table 16-5).
2. Determine the distribution of sensory loss involvement or whether one (longitudinal sensory loss) or both (transverse sensory loss) digital nerves are involved.
3. Identify the level of involvement, or percentage of digit length involved, using the top scale of Figure 16-6 for the thumb and of Figure 16-7 for the fin- gers.
4. Consult Table 16-6 for the thumb and little finger and Table 16-7 for the index, middle, and ring fin- gers to determine the digit impairment for either total or partial, transverse or longitudinal (ulnar or radial) sensory loss according to the percentage of digit length involved.
5. If both digital nerves are involved in the same digit, the sensory impairments relating to the ulnar or radial palmar nerves are added.
6. Convert the digit impairment to hand, upper extremity, and whole person impairment by using Tables 16-1, 16-2, and 16-3. When a digit has more than one impairment, obtain the total digit impairment value by combining its various impairments before converting the digit values to a hand value.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-9
Exam: A total transverse sensory loss (> 15 mm) over the index finger palmar surface from the level of the PIP joint distally (80% finger length).
Analysis: Equivalent to 40% index impairment (Figure 16-7 and Table 16-7).
Impairment Rating: 8% hand impairment (Table 16-1).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-10
Exam: A partial transverse sensory loss (7-15 mm) involving the full length of the palmar surface of the thumb from the level of the MP joint distally (100% length).
Analysis: 25% impairment of the thumb (Figure 16- 6 and Table 16-6).
Impairment Rating: 10% hand impairment (Table 16-1).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-11
Exam: A total longitudinal sensory loss (> 15 mm) over the distribution of the thumb ulnar digital nerve from the level of the IP joint distally (50% length).
Analysis: Equivalent to 15% thumb impairment (Figure 16-6 and Table 16-6).
Impairment Rating: 6% hand impairment (Table 16-1).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-12
Exam: A partial longitudinal sensory loss (7-15 mm) over the distribution of the index radial nerve from the level of the MP joint distally (100% length).
Analysis: Equivalent to 15% index impairment (Figure 16-7 and Table 16-7).
Impairment Rating: 3% hand impairment (Table 16-1).
16.4
Evaluating
	Abnormal Motion
16.4 a Clinical Measurements of Motion Figure 16-9 illustrates the principles of the range of motion (ROM) as measured on the basis of the neu- tral position of a joint being zero. The “extended anatomic position” is therefore accepted as 0° rather than 180°, and the degrees of joint motion increase in the direction the joint moves from the zero starting point. The term extension describes motion opposite to flexion. Incomplete extension from a flexed posi- tion to the neutral starting point is defined as exten- sion lag. Extension exceeding the zero starting position, as can be seen in normal metacarpopha- langeal, elbow, and knee joints, is referred to as hyperextension. Ankylosis refers to complete absence of motion of a joint. For ease of notation, a plus sign (+) is used to indicate joint hyperextension and a minus sign (–) to indicate extension lag. These signs have no mathematical significance. Using this nota- tion system, a finger joint flexion contracture of 15° with flexion to 45° would be recorded as –15° to 45°. A joint motion with 15° hyperextension and 45 flex- ion would be recorded as +15° to 45° (Figure 16-9).

The arc of motion represents the total number of degrees traced between the two extreme positions of movement in a specific plane of motion, such as from maximum flexion to maximum extension of the PIP joint. When a joint has more than one plane of move- ment, each type of motion is referred to as a unit of motion. For example, the wrist has two units of motion: flexion/extension (anteroposterior plane) and ulnar/radial deviation (lateral plane). The term func- tional position of a joint denotes the optimal or least impairing angle(s) recommended for joint fusion.
When a joint has more than one unit of motion, each separate unit is assigned a functional position. For example, the functional position of the elbow is con- sidered to be 80° flexion and 20° pronation.


Full extension or the neutral position is considered to be 0°.
90?


+15? Hyperextension 0? Full Extension
–15? Extension Lag


45? Flexion

90?


Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.


In assessing motion, the examiner should first observe what an individual can and cannot do by asking him or her to move each joint of the extremity, from the shoulder down, through its full range of motion. Both extremities should be compared. Individual joints are then evaluated separately. Similarly, movements of the digits are first evaluated as a unit by having the indi- vidual make a complete fist and then extend the digits fully over several repetitions. In determining the range of motion of individual joints, the examiner must eval- uate both the active and the passive motion. Active or voluntary motion is that performed by the active con-
traction of the governing muscles and is evaluated first. When a person has full active joint excursion, passive motion values need not to be taken because a joint that has full active excursion will have a full passive range as well. However, if the active arc of motion is incom- plete, assisted active and/or passive motion measure- ments are necessary to evaluate the joint motion.
Passive motion is that produced by an external force to determine the freedom and range of motion existing at a joint when all muscles are relaxed. An example,
is Bunnell’s test for intrinsic tightness in the hand. Assisted active motion is the result of active muscle contraction and an external force applied to the joint; it allows for stabilization of a segment to improve the mechanical advantage of the muscles that move the joint being measured. In both cases, approximately 0.5 kg of force is applied while a segment of the joint is stabilized. Measurements of active motion take prece- dence in the Guides. The actual measured goniometer readings or linear measurements are recorded.

Many different factors can limit the normal range of motion of the joints of the upper extremities.
Limitation of active motion can be due to failure of the nerve, muscle, or tendon to execute the motion. Limitation of passive motion can be from involve- ment of the joint itself, a fixed contracture, or the antagonistic muscle or tendon that holds back the motion because it is adherent or too short. Sound clinical knowledge and measurement techniques are necessary for appropriate impairment evaluation and rating.

Digital joints are measured with the wrist held in neutral position and the forearm pronated. To meas- ure the ROM of individual joints, the proximal joint(s) are stabilized in extension, and only the joint being measured is flexed. Note that if all three joints are flexed simultaneously, as in making a fist, active flexion of the metacarpophalangeal joint will be decreased. In some cases of decreased finger motion due to limited excursion of the activating musculo- tendinous unit or blockage of motion by the antago- nistic musculotendinous unit, the measurement of individual joints, as described earlier, can be normal or near normal. In these situations, the total active range of motion (TAM) of the digit is measured.
Flexion of each joint is measured while all three joints are held in a position of maximum active flex- ion, or the finger is flexed as a whole unit; similarly, extension of each joint is measured while all three joints are held in maximum extension. The methods used to derive motion impairment of a digit using individual joint measurements and the total active range of motion of a digit are different, as explained on p. 465, Combining Abnormal Motion at More Than One Finger Joint. The joint measurement tech- nique that best reflects the existing impairment is selected.


16.4 b Principle for Motion Impairment Calculation: A = E + F
The arc of motion is the total number of degrees of excursion measured between the two extreme angles of a plane of motion of a joint, for example, from maximum extension to maximum flexion. When there is complete loss of joint motion, or ankylosis, the total number of degrees of lost motion (A) equals the sum of lost extension degrees (E) and lost flexion degrees (F), or A = E + F. A always equals the total number of degrees of the normal arc of motion.


The symbol V represents the measured angle. The measured angle of extension is represented by Vext, and the measured angle of flexion is represented by Vflex. Assuming that a joint, which normally has a range of motion of 0° extension to 90° flexion, has a measured Vext at 0° and Vflex at 90°, then there is no loss of motion.

When the joint flexion is decreased, F (lost flexion degrees) equals the theoretically largest Vflex minus the measured Vflex. For example, if a joint that would normally flex to 90° has a measured Vflex at 60°:
F = 90° – 60° = 30° flexion loss.

When joint extension is decreased, E (lost extension degrees) equals the measured Vext minus the theoreti- cally smallest Vext. For example, if a joint that would normally extend to 0° has an extension lag measured at Vext 20°: E = 20° – 0° = 20° extension loss.

With decreasing flexion, Vflex decreases, and with increasing extension loss, Vext increases; as motion is lost, these values will finally meet at the same point on the arc of motion, or Vflex will equal Vext. When this occurs, there is ankylosis, or total loss of the potential arc of motion degrees (A). For example,
if a joint that would normally extend to 0° and flex to 90° is ankylosed at 40°: Vext = Vflex = 40°; E = 40° – 0° = 40°; F = 90° – 40° = 50°;
A = 40° (E) + 50° (F), or 90°; and there is total loss of the potential full arc of motion.

Impairment of finger motion may be due to loss of extension (E) with or without loss of flexion (F) or to ankylosis (A). The restricted motion impairment percents are called IE%, IF%, and IA%, respectively, and are functions of the angle (V) measured at examination.

IE% = 0% when Vext reaches its smallest theoretical value.
IF% = 0% when Vflex reaches its largest theoretical value.
IA% = IE% + IF% when Vext= Vflex.

The formula A% = E% + F% can also be written
E% = A% – F%; therefore, impairment values for lack of extension (IE%) can be derived for any measured extension angle on the basis that IE% = IA% – IF%.
The derivation of both IE% and IF% allows estimation of impairment percentages relating not only to the number of degrees of lost motion but, most important, to the location of the loss on the arc of motion.

Motion impairment curves based on the formula A% = E% + F% were derived on a 100% scale for each motion unit of each upper extremity joint, tak-
ing into consideration the functional position of each joint as recommended in the literature for fusion (eg, Figure 16-11). The value of A% reaches its maxi- mum, or 100%, at the two extreme positions of the arc of motion and drops to its lowest percent when the angle of ankylosis corresponds to the position of function of the joint. The motion impairment curves plotted on a 100% motion unit scale were converted to pie charts of regional motion impairment (thumb, finger, upper extremity) by applying the relative regional value of each respective motion unit as a conversion factor (eg, Figure 16-12).

For example, wrist functional unit = 60% of upper extremity function. Flexion/extension unit = 70% of wrist function unit, or 70% ? 60% = 42% of upper extremity function. Radial/ulnar deviation unit = 30% of wrist functional unit, or 30% ? 60% = 18% of upper extremity function. The flexion/extension motion unit impairment curve (Figure 16-27) was multiplied by 42% to derive the pie chart of upper extremity impairment (Figure 16-28) resulting from restricted wrist flexion/extension. The radial/ulnar deviation motion unit impairment curve (Figure
16-30) was multiplied by 18% to obtain the pie chart of upper extremity impairment (Figure 16-31) resulting from restricted wrist lateral deviation.


16.4 c Method for Motion Impairment Calculation
The motion impairment pie charts are used for motion impairment calculation of a specific joint. Because the same relative value scale is applied to each motion unit and to its components, the impair- ment values derived for each are added directly together to obtain the total motion impairment of a specific joint. The total impairment value of a motion unit is obtained by adding the impairment values contributed by its two component movements (eg, impairment of flexion/extension motion unit = IF% + IE%). Similarly, when a joint has more than one unit of motion (eg, elbow flexion/extension and prona- tion/supination), its total motion impairment is obtained by adding the impairment values con- tributed by each unit of motion. When a joint that has a single unit of motion (eg, MP joint) is ankylosed, IA% represents its motion impairment. When a joint that has more than one unit of motion (eg, the elbow) is ankylosed, the ankylosis impairments (IA%) derived for each motion unit are added to obtain its total motion impairment.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-13
Exam: Wrist 10° flexion, 10° extension, 0° radial deviation, and 10° ulnar deviation.
Analysis: Motion impairments derived from pie charts:
IF % at 10° VFlex = 8% (Figure 16-28). IE % at 10° VExt = 8% (Figure 16-28). IRD% at 0° VRD = 4% (Figure 16-31).
IUD% at 10° VUD = 4% (Figure 16-31).
Wrist motion impairment = (IF% + IE%) + (IRD%
+ IUD%).
Impairment Rating: Add contributing motion impairments: (8% + 8%) + (4% + 4%) = 24% impairment of the upper extremity.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-14
Exam: Wrist ankylosis 0° extension and 0° lateral deviation.
Analysis: Ankylosis impairments derived from pie charts:
IA% at 0° VFlex/Ext = 21% impairment of upper extremity (Figure 16-28).
IA% at 0° VRD/UD = 3% impairment of upper extremity (Figure 16-31).
Impairment Rating: Add contributing ankylosis impairments: Wrist motion impairment = 21% + 9% = 30% impairment of the upper extremity.

The actual ROM measurements are recorded and applied to the various impairment pie charts.
Impairment values for degree measurements falling between those listed may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-15


Exam: A finger MP joint active motion is measured at –25° extension lag and 65° flexion (Figure
16-25).
Analysis: Find listed values and interpolate for actual measurements.
IE% at –30° VExt = 12%; IE% at –20° VExt = 10%.
The impairment span between 12% and 10% is 2%.
The interpolated value for IE% at –25° VExt = 11% finger impairment.
IF% at 70° VFlex = 11%; IF% at 60° VFlex = 17%.
The impairment span between 17% and 11% is 6%.
The interpolated value for IF% at 65° VFlex = 14% finger impairment.

Impairment Rating: 11% (IE%) + 14% (IF%) = 25% finger impairment due to abnormal motion at the MP joint.


The measurements reported in the impairment tables and pie charts reflect the accepted average active range(s) of motion for each joint. However, certain people can have either lesser or greater joint flexibil- ity than average. It is therefore most important to always compare measurements of the relevant joint(s) in both extremities.

If a contralateral “normal” joint has a less than average mobility, the impairment value(s) correspon- ding to the uninvolved joint can serve as a baseline and are subtracted from the calculated impairment for the involved joint. The rationale for this decision should be explained in the report.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-16
Exam: Active wrist extension is measured at 30° in the involved extremity and at 50° in the contralat- eral, uninjured extremity (Figure 16-28).
Analysis: IE% at 30° VExt = 5% (involved wrist). IE% at 50° VExt = 2% (baseline wrist).
Impairment Rating: The upper extremity impair- ment value for the involved wrist is adjusted to 5% – 2% = 3%.


If an involved joint has “normal” motion according to the values specified in the Guides and the con- tralateral uninvolved joint has greater than average motion, there is a relative loss of motion. However, a loss of motion in a zone beyond the normal values does not as a rule represent a loss of function or impairment. In fact, with the exception of some spe- cialized activities such as gymnastics or Eastern expressive dancing (hyperextension of digits and wrist), an overly flexible joint could be considered an impairment. For example, if the hyperlaxity resulted in subluxation or dislocation, it would be ratable in accordance with Table 16-22 or 16-26. In rare cases, based on the examiner’s clinical judgment, an impairment percent not to exceed 2% of the maxi- mum regional impairment value of a unit of motion could be given. The rationale for this decision must be explained in the report.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-17

Exam: Active wrist extension is measured at 60° in the involved extremity and at 80° in the contralat- eral, uninjured extremity.
Analysis: The maximum allowable value for unilat- eral loss of wrist extension beyond the normal 60° would be 42% ? 2% = 0.84%.
Impairment Rating: This is rounded up to 1% of the upper extremity (Figure 16-28).

Motion impairment derivation methods are presented in detail for each joint of the upper extremity in the subsections covering thumb ray; finger joints; com- bining digit amputation, sensory loss, and abnormal motion impairment; determining hand impairment from two or more digits; wrist joint; elbow joint; and shoulder joint.

16.4d Thumb Ray Motion Impairment The thumb ray has three articular units: interpha- langeal (IP) joint, metacarpophalangeal (MP) joint, and carpometacarpal (CMC) joint. The five thumb ray functional units of motion have been assigned a relative value to the entire thumb ray on a 100% scale as follows:

IP joint flexion and extension:	15% MP joint flexion and extension:	 10% CMC joint:	 75%
Adduction:	20%
Radial abduction:	10%
Opposition:	45%

Unit-of-motion impairment curves were derived and expressed on a 100% motion unit scale (Figures 16-11, 16-14, 16-18, and 16-19) and then converted to pie charts or tables of thumb ray impairment by applying the relative value of each functional unit of motion as a conversion factor (Figures 16-12 and 16-15 and Tables 16-8a, 16-8b, and 16-9). Because
they are expressed on the same relative value denom- inator, the pie charts and tables of thumb impairment are used to calculate the total thumb ray motion impairment value. The percents contributed by each motion unit are added directly.
Thumb IP Joint: Flexion and Extension
The thumb IP joint motion ranges from +30° hyper- extension to 80° flexion. The functional position is 20° flexion. The relative value of this functional unit is 15% of the thumb ray.

1. Measure the maximum active flexion and exten- sion and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-10).


Ankylosis in functional position (20° flexion) receives lowest IA% value (50%).

100%

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10


80?


0%
80?	60?	40?	20?*	0?	+20? +30?
Flexion	Hyperextension


Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


2. Using Figure 16-12, match the measured angles of flexion and extension (row headed V) to their corresponding impairments of flexion (row headed IF%) and of extension (row headed IE%). Impairment percents for positions of hyperexten- sion are read above the 0° neutral position. Impairment values for measured angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-12 may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the cor- responding interval.
3. Add IF% and IE% values to obtain thumb impair- ment for decreased motion of the IP joint.
4. If the IP joint is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to its corresponding ankylo- sis impairment under the row headed IA% (Figure 16-12). Interpolate impairment values for inter- vening angles. Ankylosis in the functional posi- tion (20° flexion) is given the lowest ankylosis impairment value (7%).

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-18


Exam: A thumb IP joint has –10° extension lag and 50° flexion.
Analysis: IE% = 2%; IF% = 2% (Figure 16-12).
Impairment Rating: 2% + 2% = 4% thumb impair- ment, or 2% hand impairment (Table 16-1).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-19


Exam: A thumb IP joint has ankylosis in 65° flex- ion.
Analysis: IA% in 70° flexion = 14%; IA% in 60° flexion = 12%.
Impairment Rating: The interpolated value for IA% in 65° flexion = 13% thumb impairment, or 5% hand impairment.


IA% I %
15
0


IF%
V

13  0

15
+30?
13

11	0

+20
11 +10

91 8 0

Thumb IP

82	6
4
7
5
9

10
20*
30
4	40
3	50

7
10	9
11

60
2	70
1
11	1


80?

0

V IF%

12	13	15
14	15

IE% IA%

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis
IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
V  = Measured angles of motion
*	= Position of function

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


Thumb MP Joint: Flexion and Extension The thumb MP joint motion ranges from + 40° hyperextension to 60° flexion. The functional posi- tion is 20° flexion. The relative value of the func- tional unit is 10% of the thumb ray.

1. Measure the maximum active flexion and extension and record the goniometer readings (Figure 16-13).
2. Using Figure 16-15, match the measured angles of flexion and extension (row headed V) to their corresponding impairments of flexion (row headed IF%) and of extension (row headed IE%). Impairment percents for positions of hyperexten- sion are read above the 0° neutral position. Impairment values for measured angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-15 may be adjusted or interpolated to be proportionally in the corresponding interval.
3.
Add the values for IF% and IE% to obtain thumb impairment for decreased motion of the MP joint.
4. If the MP joint is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to its corresponding ankylo- sis impairment under the row headed IA% (Figure 16-15). Interpolate impairment values for inter- vening angles. Ankylosis in the functional posi- tion (20° flexion) is given the lowest IA%, or 5%.


Ankylosis in functional position (20° flexion) receives the lowest IA% value (50%).

100%

IA%
10	IE%
0	IF%

90

80

90	10
8	9

V
+40?


70
60	7

0	+30


+20
0
+10

50	6

060

Thumb MP

40
30	6

20
5
10

0%
+	+

1510
20*
1	30
3	40
63	2


50
60?

60?	40?	20?*	0?

20?

40?

5	1	V

Flexion	Hyperextension

7	8	0
9	10

IF% IE%

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

10

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis

IA%

IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
V  = Measured angles of motion
*	= Position of function

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-20
Exam: A thumb MP joint has +10° hyperextension and 40° flexion.
Analysis: IE% = 0%; IF% = 2% (Figure 16-15).
Impairment Rating: 0% + 2% = 2% thumb impair- ment, or 1% hand impairment (Table 16-1).

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-22


Exam: A thumb MP joint is ankylosed in 60° flexion.
Analysis: IA% = 10% thumb impairment.
Impairment Rating: 4% hand impairment.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-21
Exam: A thumb MP joint has –25° extension and 60° flexion.
Analysis: IE% = 2% (interpolated value); IF% = 0%.
Impairment Rating: 2% + 0% = 2% thumb impairment.


Thumb Radial Abduction
Radial abduction is measured in degrees as the largest angle of separation actively formed between the first and second metacarpals in the coronal plane (Figure 16-16). The stationary arm of the goniometer is aligned over the second metacarpal, and the mov- able arm over the first metacarpal. The normal angle of radial abduction is 50°. Note that in full radial adduction, the smallest angle of separation is 15° due to anatomic configurations. The relative value of radial abduction is 10% of the thumb ray.

1. Measure and record the goniometer reading for maximum active radial abduction and radial adduction, or the angle of ankylosis.
2. Using Table 16-8a, match the measured angles of radial abduction to their corresponding impair- ments of radial abduction.
3. If the CMC joint is ankylosed, match the measured angle to its corresponding ankylosis impairment (Table 16-8a) to obtain the thumb impairment due to loss of this function.
4. Convert thumb impairment to hand impairment using Table 16-1.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-23
Exam: A thumb has complete active radial adduc- tion and 25° radial abduction.
Impairment Rating: 7% thumb impairment for loss of radial abduction (Table 16-8a).

Thumb Adduction
Adduction is measured as the smallest possible dis- tance in centimeters from the flexion crease of the thumb IP joint to the distal palmar crease over the level of the MP joint of the little finger (Figures 16- 17 and 16-18). The normal range of motion is from 8 to 0 cm of adduction. The relative value of this func- tional unit is 20% of the thumb ray.


Adduction of 0 cm gives 0% impairment; 8 cm of adduction lack gives 100% impairment.


100 %

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

8 cm


Relative value of functional unit is 10% of the thumb ray motion. Motion ranges from 15° of radial adduction to 50° of radial abduction.

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7
Thumb-lack of adduction

8 cm


Redrawn from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


1. Measure and record the actual smallest active adduction distance in centimeters.
2. Consult Table 16-8b to determine the percentage of thumb impairment contributed by adduction lack or ankylosis. Impairment values for meas- ured distances falling between those shown in Table 16-8b may be adjusted or interpolated pro- portionally in the corresponding interval.


Relative value of functional unit is 20% of the thumb ray motion. Motion ranges from 8 to 0 cm of adduction.

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-24
Exam: An individual has a 4-cm thumb adduction lack.
Analysis: This is equivalent to a 20% motion unit impairment (Figure 16-18).
Impairment rating: 4% thumb impairment (Table 16-8b).

Thumb Opposition
Thumb opposition is measured in centimeters as the largest achievable distance between the flexor crease of the thumb IP joint to the distal palmar crease directly over the third MP joint (Figure 16-19). The relative value of this functional unit is 45% of the thumb ray. The normal range of opposition is from 0 to 8 cm. However, in smaller hands, the normal dis- tance of opposition can be slightly smaller. Both sides are measured and compared. If the contralateral “normal” opposition distance is smaller than aver- age, the impairment value corresponding to the unin- volved side serves as a baseline and is subtracted from the calculated impairment for the involved joint. This adjustment should be stated in the report.


Relative value of functional unit is 45% of the thumb ray motion. Motion ranges from 0 to 8 cm of oposition.

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand.. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


Redrawn from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


1. Measure and record the actual linear distance of maximum active opposition in centimeters.
2. Consult Table 16-9 to determine the percentage of thumb impairment contributed by opposition loss or ankylosis. Impairment values for measured dis- tances falling between those listed in Table 16-9 may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.


Adding Two or More Abnormal Thumb Motions
1. Measure and record the thumb impairments of flexion and extension at the IP and MP joints (Figures 16-12 and 16-15), radial abduction and adduction (Table 16-8a), adduction (Table 16-8b), and opposition (Table 16-9) as described above.
2. Add the impairment values contributed by each motion unit to determine the total thumb impair- ment due to abnormal motion.

Because the relative value of each unit of motion to the entire thumb ray was taken into consideration in the thumb impairment charts and tables, the thumb impairments resulting from abnormal motion are added directly together. If each thumb unit of motion were impaired to its maximum value, the total thumb motion impairment would add to 100%. Note that when more than one finger joint is involved, the impairment values are combined because the relative value of each finger joint (DIP, PIP, MP) was not assigned on a 100% finger unit scale.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-25


Exam: Thumb IP joint flexion and extension impair- ment of 4%, radial adduction and abduction of 0%, and opposition of 10%.
Analysis: Add the impairments: 4% + 4% + 0% + 10%.
Impairment Rating: 18% thumb impairment result- ing from abnormal motion.


The method for combining multiple digit impair- ments due to amputation, sensory loss, and abnormal motion is described in Section 16.4f.


Figure 16-21 Finger Impairments Due to Abnormal Motion at the DIP Joint


Relative value of functional unit is 45% of the finger. Ankylosis in function position (20° flexion) receives lowest IA% (30%).

IA% I %
45	IF%
0	V
42	45

0
390

+30?
42 +20
39 +10

360

360

Finger DIP

332

31	10
26 20*

304
0?	12
33

30
21	40
15	50
20	10


60
70?

35	29
39	37

16.4e Finger Motion Impairment
The fingers have three functional units of motion, each having the same relative functional value as that found in amputation impairment: DIP, 45%; PIP, 80%; and MP, 100% (Table 16-4).

For each joint, unit-of-motion impairment curves were derived according to the basic formula, A = E + F, and converted to pie charts of finger impairment values by applying the relative value of each func- tional unit as a conversion factor (Figures 16-21,
16-23, and 16-25).

In the normal hand, the MP joint can hyperextend use- fully to 20°; a small percentage of extension impair- ment has been assigned to loss of hyperextension, or IE% = 5% at 0° extension (Figure 16-25). The PIP and DIP joints normally extend to 0°, and IE% equals 0% at this angle; between the angles of 0° extension and
+30° hyperextension, impairment values are given for lack of flexion and not for hyperextension.
Consideration for positions of hyperextension allows one to rate impairment of flexion or ankylosis for angles above the 0° neutral position. For example, ankylosis of the PIP joint in 30° hyperextension equals 80% finger impairment (Figure 16-23). Note that, for each joint, the ankylosis impairment value is at its lowest for the angle of functional position.

%
42

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis
IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
V  = Measured angles of motion
*	= Position of function

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


The actual range-of-motion measurements are recorded and applied to the various impairment pie charts. Impairment values for motion measurements falling between those shown in a pie chart may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corre- sponding interval.

The techniques for clinical measurement of motion of the digital joints are described in Section 16.4a. Two methods are presented: (1) measurement of individual joints with the proximal joints stabilized in extension and (2) measurement of the total active range of motion of the digit while all three joints are flexed simultaneously. The joint measurement tech- nique that best reflects the existing impairment is selected.


DIP Joint: Flexion and Extension
The DIP joint has a normal motion of 0° extension to 70° flexion. The functional position is 20° flexion.
The relative value of this motion unit is 45% of the finger.

1. Measure the maximum flexion and extension,
and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-20).
2. Using Figure 16-21, match the measured angles (row headed V) of flexion and extension to their corresponding impairments of flexion (row headed IF%) and extension (row headed IE%). Impairment percents for positions of hyperextension are read above the 0° neutral position. Impairment values for measured angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-21 may be adjusted or interpolated pro- portionally in the corresponding interval.
3. Add IF% and IE% to obtain the finger impairment due to decreased motion of the DIP joint.
4. If the DIP joint is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to the corresponding anky- losis impairment under the row headed IA% in Figure 16-21. Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles. Ankylosis in the functional position (20° flexion) is given the lowest ankylo- sis impairment value (30%).


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-26

Exam: A middle finger DIP joint has –10° extension lag and 50° flexion.
Analysis: IE% = 2%, IF% = 10% (Figure 16-21).
Impairment Rating: 2% + 10% = 12% impairment of the middle finger, or 2% hand impairment (Table 16-1).

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-27


Exam: DIP joint has +30° hyperextension and 0° flexion.
Analysis: IE% = 0%, IF% = 36%.
Impairment Rating: 0% + 36% = 36% finger impairment.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-28


Exam: A DIP joint has ankylosis in 35° flexion.
Impairment Rating: The interpolated IA% of 34% finger impairment is calculated from the interval between 33% at 30° and 35% at 40°.


PIP Joint: Flexion and Extension
The PIP joint has a normal motion of 0° extension to 100° flexion. The functional position is 40° flexion. The relative value of this motion unit is 80% of the finger.

1. Measure the maximum active flexion and exten- sion and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-22).
2. Using Figure 16-23, match the measured angles (row headed V) of flexion and extension to their corresponding impairments of flexion (row headed IF%) and extension (row headed IE %). Impairment percents for positions of hyperextension are read above the 0° neutral position. Impairment values for measured angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-23 may be adjusted or interpolated pro- portionally in the corresponding interval.


Figure 16-23 Finger Impairments Due to Abnormal Motion at PIP Joint


Relative value of functional unit is 80% of the finger. Ankylosis in functional position (40° flexion) receives lowest IA% (50%).

IA%

IE%
80
0


IF%
V

730

80
+30?
73

0?	66

0  66

+20
+10

60  0

600

Finger PIP

354
20
748	30

100?

55	42
5311	36
14


40*
50
60
30	70


80 90


100? V


3. Add I % and I % to obtain the finger impairment

50	25	24 18
55	36	12	6	0


IF%

F	E	60	47

58	80

IE%

resulting from decreased motion of the PIP joint.
4. If the PIP joint is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to the corresponding ankylo- sis impairment (row headed IA%) in Figure 16-23. Interpolate impairment value for intervening angles. Ankylosis in the functional position (40° flexion) is given the lowest ankylosis impairment percent (50%).

69
65	70	75

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis
IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
V  = Measured angles of motion
*	= Position of function

80  IA%


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-29
Exam: A middle finger PIP joint has –15° extension lag and 60° flexion.
Analysis: The interpolated IE% of 5% finger impair- ment is calculated from the interval between 3% at –10°, and 7% at –20°. IE % = 5%; IF% = 24%
(Figure 16-23).
Impairment Rating: 5% + 24% = 29% impairment of the middle finger, or 6% hand impairment (Table 16-1).

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-30


Exam: Ankylosis of the PIP joint in 40° flexion.
Impairment Rating: IA% = 50% finger impairment.


Figure 16-25 Finger Impairments Due to Abnormal Motion at the MP Joint


Relative value of functional unit is 100% of the finger. Ankylosis in functional position (30° flexion) receives lowest IA% (45%).

IA% I %

E
600

IF% V
60

573

+20?
54 +10

545

49  0

Finger MP

51744
1038

10
20
30*

48	33	40

4512	27	50
27	22	60 70
54	41	17


80 90? V


MP Joint: Flexion and Extension

63	56
73

11	6
71	85
82	91

0

100
100

IF% IE% IA%

The finger MP joint motion ranges from +20° hyper- extension to 90° flexion. The functional position is 30° flexion. The relative value of this motion unit is 100% of the finger.

1. Measure the maximum active flexion and exten- sion, and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-24).
2. Using Figure 16-25, match the measured angles (row headed V) of flexion and extension to their corresponding impairments of flexion (row headed IF%) and extension (row headed IE %). Impairment values for positions of hyperextension are read above the 0° neutral position. Impairment values for measured angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-25 may be adjusted or interpo- lated proportionally in the corresponding interval.
3. Add IF% and IE% to obtain finger impairment resulting from decreased motion of the MP joint.
4. If the MP joint is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to the corresponding anky- losis impairment (row headed IA%) in Figure 16-
25. Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles. Ankylosis in the functional position (30° flexion) is given the lowest IA% value (45%).

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis
IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
V  = Measured angles of motion
*	= Position of function

Adapted from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-31


Exam: A middle finger MP joint has 0° extension and 50° flexion.
Analysis: IE % = 5%; IF % = 22% (Figure 16-25).
Impairment Rating: 5% + 22% = 27% impairment of the middle finger, or 5% hand impairment (Table 16-1).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-32


Exam: MP joint ankylosis in 55° flexion.
Impairment Rating: The interpolated IA% of 68% finger impairment for ankylosis in 55° flexion is calculated from the interval between 63% at 50° and 73% at 60° (Figure 16-25).


Combining Abnormal Motion at More Than One Finger Joint
Method for individual joint measurements:
1. Determine the motion impairment of each joint in terms of finger impairment, as described in the preceding pages.
2. Combine the finger impairments derived for each joint to obtain the total finger impairment due to loss of motion (Combined Values Chart, p. 604). If all three joints are involved, combine the result- ing impairment value from the first two joints to the value of the third joint.

Method for total active range-of-motion measurements:
1. Combine the IE% of all three joints.
2. Combine the IF% of all three joints.
3. Subtract the extension combined value from the flexion combined value to determine the finger impairment due to decreased motion.

Express the finger impairment in terms of the hand, upper extremity, and whole person impairment (Tables 16-1 through 16-3).

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-33

Exam: Middle finger has a DIP joint impairment of 12%, PIP joint impairment of 31%, and MP joint impairment of 27%.
Analysis: 12% combined with 31% = 39% (Combined Values Chart, p. 604); 39% combined with 27% = 55% total middle finger motion impairment.
Impairment Rating: This is equivalent to an impair- ment of 11% of the hand (Table 16-1), 10% of the upper extremity (Table 16-2), and 6% of the whole person (Table 16-3).


16.4f Multiple Digit Impairments Combining Digit Amputation, Sensory Loss, and Abnormal Motion Impairments of
the Hand
1. Determine separately the digit impairments con- tributed by amputation, sensory loss, and abnor- mal motion.
2. Combine the digit impairment percents using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to obtain the total digit impairment.
3.
Use Tables 16-1 through 16-3 to relate the digit impairment in succession to impairment of the hand, the upper extremity, and the whole person. If more than one digit is involved, the impairment values contributed by each digit are added to obtain the total hand impairment before making the conversion to upper extremity impairment.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-34


Exam: A middle finger amputation impairment of 20%, a sensory impairment of 10%, and an abnor- mal motion impairment of 10%.
Analysis: 20% combined with 10% = 28%; 28% combined with 10% = 35% middle finger impair- ment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Impairment Rating: This corresponds to 7% impairment of the hand (Table 16-1), 6% impair- ment of the upper extremity (Table 16-2), and 4% impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-35


Exam: Thumb has 30% amputation impairment, 10% sensory impairment, and 10% abnormal motion impairment.
Analysis: 30% combined with 10% = 37%; 37% combined with 10% = 43% thumb impairment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Impairment Rating: This corresponds to 17% impairment of the hand, 15% impairment of the upper extremity, and 9% impairment of the whole person (Tables 16-1, 16-2, and 16-3).

Determining Hand Impairment From Two or More Digits
1. If two or more digits are involved, calculate sepa- rately the total digit impairment for each.
2. Using Table 16-1, convert each digit impairment to a hand impairment value.
3. Add the hand impairment values contributed by each digit to obtain the total hand impairment.
4. In a hand presenting an upper extremity impair- ment from amputation of the thumb proximal to the MP joint, the hand impairment resulting from involvement of the other digits is converted to upper extremity impairment (Table 16-2) and then added directly to the upper extremity impairment value resulting from amputation of the thumb ray (Table 16-4).
5. Using Tables 16-2 and 16-3, the hand impairment is related to that of the upper extremity and the whole person.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-36
Exam: A 10% impairment of the thumb, 20% impairment of the index finger, 30% impairment of the middle finger, 40% impairment of the ring finger, and 50% impairment of the little finger.
Analysis: Digit impairments are converted to hand impairments (Table 16-2) and added to obtain the total impairment.

% Impairment	% Impairment
of Digit	of Hand
10, thumb	4
20, index finger	4
30, middle finger	6
40, ring finger	4
50, little finger	5
Total hand impairment	23
Impairment Rating: Tables 16-2 and 16-3 show that 23% hand impairment is equivalent to 21% impairment of the upper extremity and 13% impairment of the whole person.


16.4g Wrist Motion Impairment
The wrist functional unit represents 60% of the upper extremity function. The wrist has two units of motion (see Figure 16-26), each contributing a rela- tive value to its function. The units-of-motion impairments are converted to upper extremity impairments by multiplying their respective values by 60% as follows:

1. Flexion and extension unit: 70% of wrist function; 70% ? 60% = 42% of upper extremity function.
2. Radial and ulnar deviation unit: 30% of wrist function; 30% ? 60% = 18% of upper extremity function.

For each wrist functional unit of motion, impairment curves were derived according to the basic formula, A = E + F and expressed on a 100% motion unit scale (Figures 16-27 and 16-30). These impairment curves were converted to pie charts of upper extrem- ity impairment by applying their relative upper extremity functional value as a conversion factor (Figures 16-28 and 16-31).


Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


The upper extremity impairment due to abnormal wrist motion is calculated from the pie charts by adding directly together the upper extremity impair- ment contributed by each motion unit.

The actual range-of-motion measurements are recorded and applied to the various impairment pie charts. Impairment values for motion measurements falling between those shown in the pie chart may
be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.


Ankyloses in functional positions (10° extension to 10° flexion) are given the lowest IA% value (50%).

Relative value of this functional unit to upper extremity impairment
is 42%.

IA%

100%

90

42
36	0

IE%


80	29
70
26
60	5
50	24

2	42
4	36
25	50
21	40
30


60?

IF%
V

40
30	218

17
20
1310*


Extension

20	2111

10 0*

Wrist

10

0%
60?	40?	20? 10*  0*  10* 20?	40?	60?

2113
18

810*
20
7


Flexion

Extension	Flexion


Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation

25	5	30

2924	3	50
30	2


60?
V

of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds.
Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

33	36

38

0
IF%
42  IE%


Flexion and Extension
The normal range of wrist motion is from 60° exten-

42

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis

IA%

sion to 60° flexion. The position of function is from 10° extension to 10° flexion. The relative value of this motion unit is 42% of the upper extremity function.

1. Measure maximum active wrist flexion and exten- sion, and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-26).
2. In Figure 16-28, match the measured flexion and extension angles (row headed V) to their corre- sponding impairments of flexion (row headed IF%) and extension (row headed IE%). Impairment values for angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-28 may be adjusted or interpolated pro- portionally in the corresponding interval.
3. Add IF% and IE% to obtain the percent of upper extremity impairment contributed by decreased wrist flexion and extension.
4. If the wrist is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to its corresponding ankylo- sis impairment (row headed IA%) in Figure 16-28. Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles.

IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
V  = Measured angles of motion
*	= Positions of function

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


Ankyloses in functional positions (10° extension to 10° flexion) are given the lowest IA%, or 50% of this motion unit value (Figure 16-27). This corresponds to 21% impairment of the upper extremity (Figure 16-28). Wrist ankylosis in 60° flexion or 60° exten- sion represents 100% loss of wrist extension and flexion function (Figure 16-27). This is equivalent to 70% impairment of wrist function, or 42% impair- ment (70% ? 60%) of the upper extremity resulting from loss of this wrist motion unit (Figure 16-28).


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-37
Exam: Wrist extension of 10°and flexion of 10° (Figure 16-28).
Analysis: IE% = 8% impairment of the upper extremity; IF% = 8% impairment of the upper extremity.
Impairment Rating: Add 8% + 8% = 16% impair- ment of the upper extremity resulting from decreased wrist flexion and extension.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-38
Exam: Wrist ankylosis in 35° flexion.
Impairment Rating: The interpolated value for IA% in 35° flexion = 31% impairment of the upper extremity.


Radial and Ulnar Deviation
The normal range of wrist motion is from 20° radial deviation to 30° ulnar deviation. The position of function is from neutral to 10° ulnar deviation. The relative value of this motion unit is 18% of upper extremity function.

1. Measure the maximum active wrist radial and ulnar deviation, and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-29).
2. Using Figure 16-31, match the measured ulnar and radial deviation angles (row headed V) to the corresponding impairments of radial deviation (row headed IRD%) and ulnar deviation (row headed IUD%). Impairment values for angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-31 may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.
3. Add IRD% + IUD% to obtain the upper extremity impairment value contributed by decreased wrist lateral deviation.
4. If the wrist is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to its corresponding ankylo- sis impairment value (row headed IA%) in Figure 16-31. Interpolate impairment values for interven- ing angles.


Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


Ankyloses in functional positions (0° to 10° ulnar deviation) receive the lowest IA%, or 50% of this motion unit value (Figure 16-30). This corresponds to 9% impairment of the upper extremity (Figure
16-31). Wrist ankylosis in either 30° ulnar deviation or 20° radial deviation represents 100% loss of wrist lateral deviation function (Figure 16-30). This is equivalent to 30% impairment of wrist function and 18% impairment (60% ? 30%) of the upper extrem-
ity (Figure 16-31).


Ankyloses in functional positions (0° to 10° ulnar deviation) are given the lowest ankylosis impairment (50%).

Relative value of this functional unit to upper extremity impairment
is 18%.

IA%

100%

90

18	IUD%
16	18 IRD%


80

70

60

15
1412  1

0	V
20?
15


50

129

10
35*

Radial Deviation

40

9	5	4 0*

Wrist

30

20

10

0%

945
9 4	5
3

5*
10*
15
9

Ulnar Deviation


20

20?	10?	0?*  5?* 10?*	20?	30?
Radial Deviation	Ulnar Deviation

12	12
2	15

25
30?
	V

14	1

18
IRD%


Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

16	0
18

IUD% IA%

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis
IRD% = Impairment due to loss of radial deviation
IUD% = Impairment due to loss of ulnar deviation
V	= Measured angles of motion
*	= Positions of function

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-39
Exam: Wrist ulnar deviation 0° and radial deviation 10° (Figure 16-31).
Analysis: IUD% = 5% impairment of the upper extremity. IRD% = 2% impairment of the upper extremity.
Impairment Rating: Add 5% + 2% = 7% impair- ment of the upper extremity resulting from decreased wrist lateral deviation.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-40


Exam: Wrist ankylosis in 15° radial deviation.
Impairment Rating: IA% = 16% impairment of the upper extremity resulting from loss of wrist lateral deviation.


Determining Impairment Due to Abnormal Wrist Motion
1. Using Figures 16-28 and 16-31, determine the impairment of the upper extremity contributed by each wrist unit of motion (flexion and extension, radial and ulnar deviation) by adding IF% + IE% and IRD% + IUD%.
2. Because the relative upper extremity value of each wrist functional unit has been taken into consider- ation in the impairment pie charts, the impair- ments contributed by each unit of motion are added directly to determine the impairment of the upper extremity due to abnormal wrist motion, or it equals (IF% + IE%) + (IRD% + IUD%).
3. If the wrist joint is ankylosed, add the ankylosis impairment contributed by each unit of motion to determine the upper extremity impairment due to loss of wrist motion.
4. Use Table 16-3 to relate the impairment of the upper extremity to impairment of the whole person.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-41

Exam: 16% upper extremity impairment due to loss of wrist flexion and extension and 7% impairment resulting from loss of wrist radial and ulnar deviation.
Analysis: Add 16% + 7% = 23% impairment of the upper extremity.
Impairment Rating: 14% impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-42

Exam: Wrist ankylosis in 0° flexion and 0° lateral deviation (functional position range) (Figures 16-28 and 16-31).
Analysis: Flexion IA% = 21%; lateral deviation IA%
= 9%.
Impairment Rating: Add 21% + 9% = 30% impair- ment of the upper extremity, or 18% impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3).

16.4h Elbow Motion Impairment
The elbow functional unit represents 70% of upper extremity function. The elbow joint has two func- tional units of motion, each contributing a relative value to its function. The unit-of-motion impair- ments are converted to upper extremity impairments by multiplying their respective values by 70% as follows:

1. Flexion and extension: 60% of elbow function; 60% ? 70% = 42% of upper extremity function.
2. Pronation and supination: 40% of elbow function; 40% ? 70% = 28% of upper extremity function.

For each elbow functional unit of motion, impair- ment curves were derived according to the basic for- mula, A = E + F and expressed on a 100% motion unit scale (Figures 16-33 and 16-36). These impair- ment curves were converted to pie charts of upper extremity impairment by applying the upper extrem- ity functional value of each motion unit as a conver- sion factor (Figures 16-34 and 16-37).

The upper extremity impairment due to abnormal elbow motion is calculated from the pie charts by adding directly the upper extremity impairment val- ues contributed by each motion unit.

The actual range-of-motion measurements are recorded and applied to the various impairment pie charts. Impairment values for motion measurements falling between those shown in the pie chart may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corre- sponding interval.


Flexion and Extension
The normal range of motion is considered to be from 140° flexion to 0° extension. The position of func- tion is 80° flexion. The relative value of this motion unit is 42% of the upper extremity function.

1. Measure the maximum active elbow flexion and extension, and record the actual goniometer read- ings (Figure 16-32).
2. In Figure 16-34, match the measured flexion and extension angles (row headed V) to their corre- sponding impairments of flexion (row headed IF%) and extension (row headed IE%). Impairment values for angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-34 may be adjusted or interpolated pro- portionally in the corresponding interval.
3. Add IF% and IE% to obtain the upper extremity impairment percent contributed by decreased elbow flexion and extension.
4. If the elbow is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to its corresponding ankylo- sis impairment (row headed IA%) in Figure 16-34. Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles.


Ankylosis in the functional position (80° flexion) is given the lowest IA%, or 50% of this motion unit value (Figure 16-33). This corresponds to 21% impairment of the upper extremity (Figure 16-34). Ankylosis in either 0° extension or 140° flexion rep- resents a 100% loss of elbow flexion and extension function (Figure 16-33). This is equivalent to 60% impairment of elbow function and 42% impairment (60% ? 70%) of the upper extremity due to loss of this elbow motion unit (Figure 16-34).


Ankylosis in functional position (80° flexion) is given the lowest IA% value (50%).

100%

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10


0%
0?	20?	40?	60?	80?*	100?	120?	140?
Extension	Flexion

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


Relative value of this functional unit to upper extremity impairment is 42%.

IA%
42	IE%

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-44


Exam: Elbow ankylosis in 80° flexion.
Impairment Rating: IA% = 21% impairment of the upper extremity resulting from loss of flexion and extension.


Pronation and Supination
The normal range of motion is from 80° supination

38	42
37
3432	1

IF%

0	V
140?

to 80° pronation. The position of function is 20° pronation. The relative value of this motion unit is 28% of the upper extremity function.

3127
2721
2517
2111
8

2	130
120
4 110
6  100
890
10 80*
70
15
60


Flexion


Elbow


Extension

Impairments of pronation and supination are ascribed to the elbow because the major muscles for this function are inserted about the elbow. This applies even if the loss of forearm rotation results primarily from wrist involvement in the presence of an intact elbow.

1. Measure the maximum active elbow pronation

23	19	50
6
25	23	40
5	27	30 20
28	4	31


10  0?  V

and supination, and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-35).
2. In Figure 16-37, match the measured supination and pronation angles (row headed V) to their

31	3
34

34 37 42
2	1	0
36	38	42

IF% IE% IA%

corresponding impairments of pronation (row headed IP%) and supination (row headed IS%). Impairment values for angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-37 may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis
IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
V  = Measured angles of motion
*	= Position of function

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-43

Exam: Elbow extension lag of – 40° and flexion to 65° (Figure 16-34).
Analysis: IE% = 4% impairment of the upper extremity; the interpolated value for IF% at 65° = 17% impairment of the upper extremity.
Impairment Rating: Add 4% + 17% = 21% impair- ment of the upper extremity due to decreased elbow flexion and extension.

interval.
3. Add IP% and IS% to obtain the upper extremity impairment percent contributed by decreased forearm rotation.
4. If the elbow is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to its corresponding ankylo- sis impairment (row headed IA%) in Figure 16-37. Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles.

Ankylosis in the functional position (20° pronation) is given the lowest IA%, or 30% of this motion unit value (Figure 16-36). This is equivalent to 8% impairment of the upper extremity (Figure 16-37). Ankylosis in 80° of pronation or supination repre- sents 100% impairment of the forearm rotation unit (Figure 16-36). This is equivalent to 40% impair- ment of elbow function and 28% impairment (40% ? 70%) of the upper extremity due to loss of forearm rotation (Figure 16-37).


Ankylosis in functional position (20° pronation) is given the lowest IA% value (30%).


100%

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0%
80?	60?	40?	20?	0?	20?*	40?	60?	80?
Supination	Pronation

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-45
Exam: Pronation of the forearm to 30° and supina- tion to 10° (Figure 16-37).
Analysis: IP% = 3% impairment of the upper extremity. IS% = 3% impairment of the upper extremity.
Impairment Rating: Add 3% + 3% = 6% upper extremity impairment due to decreased forearm rotation.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-46
Exam: Elbow ankylosis in 30° supination.
Impairment Rating: IA% = 23% impairment of the upper extremity due to loss of forearm rotation.


Determining Impairment Due to Abnormal Elbow Motion
1. Using Figures 16-34 and 16-37, determine the impairment of the upper extremity contributed by each elbow unit of motion (flexion and extension, pronation and supination), as described in preced- ing parts, by adding IF% + IE% and IP% + IS%.
2.
Because the relative upper extremity value of each elbow functional unit has been taken into consid- eration in the impairment pie charts, the impair- ment values contributed by each unit of motion are added directly to determine the impairment of the upper extremity due to abnormal elbow motion, or it equals (IF% + IE%) + (IP% + IS%).
3. If the elbow joint is ankylosed, add the ankylosis impairments contributed by each unit of motion to determine the upper extremity impairment result- ing from loss of elbow motion.
4. Use Table 16-3 to relate the impairment of the upper extremity to impairment of the whole person.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-47


Analysis: 19% upper extremity impairment due to loss of elbow flexion and extension and 6% impairment due to loss of pronation and supina- tion (Figures 16-34 and 16-37).
Add 19% + 6% = 25% impairment of the upper extremity.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3).


Relative value of this functional unit to upper extremity impairment is 28%.

16.4i Shoulder Motion Impairment
The shoulder functional unit represents 60% of the upper extremity function. The shoulder has three functional units of motion, each contributing a rela- tive value to its function. The unit-of-motion impair- ments are converted to upper extremity impairments by multiplying their respective values by 60% as

27	28
26	27	28

IA% IP%

follows:

1. Flexion: 40% of shoulder function.

25	25
24	24	1
22	1
23	2	50
21
2	40

0	0
70 80?

IS% V

Extension: 10% of shoulder function.
Flexion and extension unit: 50% of shoulder function, or 50% ? 60% = 30% of upper extremity function.
2. Abduction: 20% of shoulder function.

22 19	30
3	20
18 15	3	10
151230


Supination


Elbow

Adduction: 10% of shoulder function.
Abduction and adduction unit: 30% of shoulder function, or 30% ? 60% = 18% of upper extremity function.
3. Internal rotation: 10% of shoulder function.

128
84

4	10
4 20*
30
6	40
3


Pronation

External rotation: 10% of shoulder function.
Internal and external rotation unit: 20% of shoulder function, or 20% ? 60% = 12% of upper extremity function.

9	8	50
3	13	60 70
11	2	18 22
15	1
19	1


80?

28
0


V IS%
IP%

For each shoulder functional unit of motion, impair- ment curves were derived according to the basic for- mula, A = E + F, and expressed on a 100% motion unit scale (Figures 16-39, 16-42, and 16-45). These impairment curves were converted to pie charts of

23


IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis

28 IA%

upper extremity impairments by applying the upper extremity functional value of each motion unit as a conversion factor (Figures 16-40, 16-43, and 16-46).

The upper extremity impairment resulting from

IP% = Impairment due to loss of pronation
IS% = Impairment due to loss of supination
V  = Measured angles of motion
*	= Position of function

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-48

Exam: Elbow ankylosis in 80° flexion and 30° supination.
Analysis: Flexion IA% = 21%; supination IA% = 23%. Add 21% + 23% = 44% impairment of the upper extremity.
Impairment Rating: 26% impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3).

abnormal shoulder motion is calculated from the pie charts by adding directly the upper extremity impair- ment values contributed by each motion unit.

The actual range-of-motion measurements are recorded and applied to the various impairment pie charts. Impairment values for motion measurements falling between those shown in the pie chart may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corre- sponding interval.


Flexion and Extension
The normal range of motion is considered to be from 180° flexion to 50° extension. The positions of func- tion range from 40° flexion to 20° flexion. The rela- tive value of this motion unit is 30% of the upper extremity function.

1. Measure the maximum active shoulder flexion and extension, and record the goniometer readings (Figure 16-38).
2. In Figure 16-40, match the measured flexion and extension angles (row headed V) to their corre- sponding impairments of flexion (row headed IF%) and extension (row headed IE%). Impairment values for measured angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-40 may be adjusted or interpo- lated proportionally in the corresponding interval.
3. Add I % + I % to obtain the percent of upper
F	E

extremity impairment contributed by decreased shoulder flexion and extension.
4. If the shoulder is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to its corresponding ankylo- sis impairment (row headed IA%) in Figure 16-40. Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles.

Ankyloses in functional positions (40° flexion to 20° flexion) are given the lowest IA%, or 50% of this motion unit value (Figure 16-39). This corresponds to 15% impairment of the upper extremity (Figure 16-40). Ankylosis in 50° extension or 180° flexion represents 100% loss of this shoulder motion unit (Figure 16-39). This is equivalent to 50% impair- ment of shoulder function, or 30% impairment
(50% ? 60%) of the upper extremity resulting from loss of this shoulder unit of motion (Figure 16-40).

0?	0?


Ankyloses in functional positions (40° to 20° flexion) are given the lowest IA% value (50%).

100%

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0%
50?40?  20?  0?  20?*30?*40?* 60?  80? 100? 120? 140? 160? 180?
Extension	Flexion


Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


Relative value of this functional unit to upper extremity impairment is 30%.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-50


Exam: Shoulder ankylosis in 30° flexion.
Impairment Rating: IA% = 15% impairment of the upper extremity due to loss of this shoulder unit of motion.


29
29	27
26


29	30	30
28  29  30
1	1	0


 IA%
IE% IF%


Abduction and Adduction
The normal range of motion is considered to be from 180° abduction to 50° adduction. The positions of

28
25
2824	3
4

3

130

2
150
140

160 170 18 0?  V

function range from 50° abduction to 20° abduction. The relative value of this motion unit is 18% of the upper extremity function.

28 23
2722
2721
2518
15

120
5 110
5 100
690
7 80
70
7
60


Flexion


Shoulder


1. Measure the maximum active shoulder abduction and adduction, and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-41).
2. In Figure 16-43, match the measured abduction
V	and adduction angles (row headed V) to their cor-

22	8	50
12

Extension


50?

IF%


IE%

responding impairments of abduction (row headed

20	9

40*

40	30	I %

I	%) and adduction (row headed I

%).

8	10

30* 20*

20 30	28	0	A

ABD

ADD

17	10

10  0  10

26	1	30

Impairment values for motion measurements

5
15	5
15

11 16 21
4	3	3
15	19	24

23 24
2	2
2526

1	29
27

falling between those listed in Figure 16-43 may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.
3. Add IABD% + IADD% to obtain the upper extremity

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis
IE% = Impairment due to loss of extension
IF% = Impairment due to loss of flexion
V  = Measured angles of motion
*	= Positions of function

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-49

Exam: Shoulder flexion of 90° and extension of 0° (Figure 16-39).
Analysis: IF% = 6% impairment of the upper extremity. IE% = 3% impairment of the upper extremity.
Impairment Rating: Add 6% + 3% = 9% impair- ment of the upper extremity due to decreased shoulder flexion and extension.

impairment contributed by decreased shoulder abduction and adduction.
4. If the shoulder is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to its corresponding ankylo- sis impairment (row headed IA%) in Figure 16-43. Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles.
5. Ankyloses in functional positions (50° abduction to 20° abduction) are given the lowest impairment percent, or 50% of this motion unit value (Figure 16-42). This corresponds to 9% impairment of the upper extremity (Figure 16-43). Ankylosis in either 50° adduction or 180° abduction represents 100% loss of this shoulder unit of motion (Figure 16-42). This is equivalent to 30% impairment of shoulder function, or 18% impairment (30% ? 60%) of the upper extremity resulting from loss of this shoulder motion unit (Figure 16-43).


Relative value of this functional unit to upper extremity impairment is 18%.


17	18	18
17	16  18  18

 IA% IADD%

17	16

1  0	0

IABD%

17	15
15
1714	2

1
2
140


160
150

170 18 0?  V

16 13
16

3	130
120
3
110


Abduction

12 4


100

1612

490

Shoulder

14 9
12 7

5  80
70
5
60
5  6	50*


Adduction


V
50?


IABD%
IADD%

0?	11	6
9

40*
6
7


30* 20*


10  0

40	18
30
10 20	17
16

IA%

18

3	7
9	2	2
9


10 12
2	2

14 15
1	1

0
1	17
17

9	12	14

15	16

IA%  = Impairment due to ankylosis
IABD% = Impairment due to loss of abduction
IADD% = Impairment due to loss of adduction
V	= Measured angles of motion
*	= Positions of function


Ankyloses in functional positions (50° to 20° abduction) are given the lowest IA% (50%).

100%

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0%
180?  160?  140?  120? 100?  80?  60?50?*40?*30?*20?*  0?	20?  40? 50?
Abduction	Adduction


Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-51


Exam: Shoulder abduction to 100° and adduction to 0° (Figure 16-43).
Analysis: IABD% = 4% impairment of the upper extremity. IADD% = 2% impairment of the upper extremity.
Impairment Rating: Add 4% +2% = 6% impair- ment of the upper extremity resulting from decreased shoulder abduction and adduction.


Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-52
Exam: Shoulder ankylosis in 40° abduction.
Impairment Rating: 9% impairment of the upper extremity due to loss of this shoulder motion unit.


Internal and External Rotation
The normal range of motion is from 90° internal rotation to 90° external rotation. The positions of function range from 30° internal rotation to 50° internal rotation. The relative functional value of this motion unit is 12% of the upper extremity function.


1. Measure the maximum active shoulder internal and external rotation, and record the actual goniometer readings (Figure 16-44).
2. From Figure 16-46, match the measured internal and external rotation angles (row headed V) to their corresponding impairments of internal rota- tion (row headed IIR%) and external rotation (row headed IER%). Impairment values for angles falling between those listed in Figure 16-46 may be adjusted or interpolated proportionally in the corresponding interval.
3. Add IIR% + IER% to obtain the value for upper extremity impairment contributed by decreased shoulder rotation.
4. If the shoulder is ankylosed, match the measured angle (row headed V) to its corresponding ankylo- sis impairment (row headed IA%) in Figure 16-46. Interpolate impairment values for intervening angles.

Ankyloses in functional positions (30° to 50° internal rotation) are given the lowest IA%, or 50% of this motion unit value (Figure 16-45). This corresponds to 6% impairment of the upper extremity (Figure
16-46). Ankylosis in either 90° internal or external rotation represents 100% loss of shoulder rotation function (Figure 16-45). This is equivalent to 20% impairment of shoulder function, or 12% impairment (20% ? 60%) of the upper extremity resulting from loss of shoulder rotation (Figure 16-46).


Ankyloses in functional positions (30° internal rotation to 50° internal rotation) are given the lowest IA% (50%).

100%

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0%
90? 80? 70? 60? 50?* 40?*30?* 20? 10? 0? 10? 20? 30? 40? 50? 60? 70? 80? 90?
Internal Rotation	External Rotation


Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.


Relative value of this functional unit to upper extremity impairment is 12%.

Determining Impairment Due to Abnormal Shoulder Motion
1. Using Figures 16-40, 16-43, and 16-46, determine the impairment of the upper extremity contributed by each shoulder unit of motion (flexion and extension, abduction and adduction, internal and external rotation) by adding I % + I %, I	% +

F	E	ABD

11
10
10	0	0

11	12
0	0
12

IA% IER%
I %

IADD% and IIR% + IER%, as described in preceding sections.
2. Because the relative upper extremity value of each


9	1
1
9  1	8


10
9
50*

11 11	 IR
70 80 90?  V
60

shoulder functional unit has been taken into con- sideration in the impairment pie charts, the impairment values contributed by each unit of

8  1	8
7
8

40*
30*
20


External rotation

motion are added to determine the impairment of
the upper extremity due to abnormal shoulder

2	10	motion, or it equals (IF% + IE%) + (IABD% +

72 50
2	5  10
20
2  4	30
4


40

Shoulder


Internal rotation

IADD%) + (IIR% + IER%).
3. If the shoulder is ankylosed, add the ankylosis impairments contributed by each unit of motion to determine the upper extremity impairment result- ing from loss of shoulder motion.

6  2	3	50
3	2	60 70
6	4	2


80 90? V
4.
Use Table 16-3 to relate the impairment of the upper extremity to impairment of the whole

6	5	1  0	0

 IIR%

person.

7	8	10  12


IER%

9

IA% = Impairment due to ankylosis


10	12


IA%

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-55


Exam: Shoulder flexion and extension impairment

IIR% = Impairment due to loss of internal rotation
IER% = Impairment due to loss of external rotation
V	= Measured angles of motion
*	= Positions of function

Redrawn with permission from Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter JM, Schneider LH, Mackin E, Calahan A, eds. Rehabilitation in the Hand. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:31-69.

of 9%, abduction and adduction impairment of 5%, and internal and external rotation impairment of 2% (Figures 16-40, 16-43, and 16-46).
Analysis: Add 9% + 5% + 2% = 16% impairment of the upper extremity.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-53

Exam: Shoulder internal rotation of 40° and external rotation of 50° (Figure 16-46).
Analysis: IIR% = 3% impairment of upper extremity.
IER% = 1% impairment of upper extremity.
Impairment Rating: Add 3% + 1% = 4% impair- ment of upper extremity resulting from decreased shoulder rotation.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-56


Exam: Shoulder ankylosis in 0° extension, 0° adduc- tion, and 0° rotation.
Analysis: Extension IA% = 24%; adduction
IA% = 14%; rotation, IA% = 7%. Add 24% + 14%
+ 7% = 45% impairment of the upper extremity.
Impairment Rating: 27% impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-54
Exam: Shoulder ankylosis in 10° external rotation.
Impairment Rating: IA% = 8% impairment of the upper extremity resulting from loss of shoulder rotation.


16.5 Impairment of the Upper Extremities Due to Peripheral
     Nerve Disorders
The peripheral nerves constitute an intricate system that carries neural impulses traveling in both direc- tions between the spinal cord and other tissues of the body, and through it many important body functions are regulated. Accurate diagnosis of peripheral nerve disorders is based on a detailed history, a thorough physical examination with special emphasis on the nervous and vascular systems, and appropriate diag- nostic tests, including a variety of electrical and imaging studies. Excellent knowledge of the mor- phologic anatomy and physiology of the nervous system is a prerequisite. Underlying causes of neuro- muscular dysfunction that may mimic specific regional defects must be detected and may include diabetes mellitus, chronic alcohol abuse, systemic neurologic disorders, hypothyroidism, and other sys- temic diseases. A failure to recognize a preexisting alteration of sensory or motor nerve function can lead to erroneous conclusions after nerve injury.

The spinal nerves consist of 31 pairs of symmetri- cally arranged nerves, each leaving and entering the spinal cord via two roots: the ventral root carries motor axons originating from the ventral horn of the spinal cord and merges with the dorsal root, which contains dorsal sensory ganglion axons, to form the spinal nerve. As the spinal nerves exit the spinal col- umn through the intervertebral foramina, they imme- diately divide into two primary rami. The anterior primary rami of the four lower cervical nerves
(C5-8), together with a greater part of the first tho- racic nerve (T1) and occasional contributions from the second thoracic nerve (T2), form the brachial plexus. The spinal nerves contain three main groups of fibers: (1) sensory (afferent) fibers that carry to the central nervous system impulses arising from various receptors in the skin, muscles, tendons, liga- ments, bones, and joints; (2) motor (efferent) fibers, which include large alpha motor neuron fibers con- ducting impulses from the spinal cord to skeletal muscle fibers; small gamma motor neuron fibers carrying impulses to muscle spindles for feedback control; and (3) autonomic system fibers, which
are efferent and are concerned with the control of smooth muscles and glands.


This section presents a method of evaluating upper extremity impairments related to disorders of the spinal nerves (C5 to C8 and T1), the brachial plexus, and major peripheral nerves of the upper extremities. It also addresses the evaluation of specific condi- tions, including entrapment/compression neuropathy and complex regional pain syndromes (CRPS), which include CRPS I/reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD) and CRPS II/causalgia.

Sensory deficits in the digits strictly due to lesions of digital nerves are evaluated according to Section
16.3. Impairments relating to the spinal cord and central nervous system are considered in Chapters 13 and 15 of the Guides, respectively. Impairment due to chronic pain is discussed in Chapter 18, Pain. Motivation and behavioral concerns are considered in Chapter 14, Mental and Behavioral Disorders.


16.5a Impairment Evaluation Principles The evaluation of permanent impairment resulting from peripheral nerve disorders is based on the anatomic distribution and severity of loss of function resulting from (1) sensory deficits or pain and
(2) motor deficits and loss of power. Characteristic deformities and manifestations resulting from peripheral nerve lesions, such as restricted motion, atrophy, and vasomotor, trophic, and reflex changes, have been taken into consideration in the estimated impairment values shown in this section. Therefore, when an impairment results strictly from a peripheral nerve lesion, in the absence of CRPS, the motion impairment values derived from Section 16.4 are not applied to this section to avoid duplication or unwar- ranted increase in the impairment estimation. For example, the claw hand deformity of MP joint hyper- extension and IP joint flexion of the ring and little fingers is a classic manifestation of an ulnar nerve lesion; in absence of CRPS II/causalgia, the impair- ment value for motor deficit of the ulnar nerve is derived according to this section and applied without assigning additional impairment for loss of motion. However, if restricted motion cannot be attributed strictly to a peripheral nerve lesion, such as would be the case in CRPS I/RSD, the motion impairment val- ues are evaluated separately according to Section
16.4 and then combined (Combined Values Chart,
p. 604) with the peripheral nerve system impairment value derived from this section.


16.5b Impairment Evaluation Methods The upper extremity impairment is calculated by multiplying the grade of severity of the sensory deficit (Table 16-10a) and/or of the motor deficit (Table 16-11a) by the respective maximum upper extremity impairment value resulting from sensory and/or motor deficits of each nerve structure involved, as listed in Section 16.5c, Regional Impairment Determination: spinal nerves, Table 16- 13; brachial plexus, Table 16-14; and major periph- eral nerves, Table 16-15. When both sensory and motor functions are involved, the impairment values derived for each are combined (Combined Values Chart, p. 604). The steps of the impairment determi- nation method are detailed below.

The origins and functions of the peripheral nerves that serve the upper extremities are summarized in Table 16-12. The motor innervation of the upper extremity is shown in Figure 16-47. The cutaneous innervation and related nerves are shown in Figure 16-48, the dermatomes of the upper extremities in Figure 16-49, and a schematic diagram of the brachial plexus in Figure 16-50.

Impairment Determination Method
Use the following method to evaluate the impairment resulting from each peripheral nerve structure:

1. If sensory deficits or pain is present, localize the distribution and relate it to the nerve structure involved (Table 16-12 and Figures 16-48, 16-49,
and 16-50).
2. If motor deficits or loss of power is present, identify the key muscles involved and relate the motor deficit to the nerve structure(s) involved (Table 16-12 and Figures 16-47 and 16-50).
3. Grade the severity of sensory deficits or pain according to Table 16-10a and/or that of the motor deficits according to Table 16-11a.
4. Find the values for maximum impairment of the upper extremity due to sensory and/or motor defi- cits of the nerve structure involved: individual spinal nerve (Table 16-13), brachial plexus (Table 16-14), and major peripheral nerves (Table 16-15).
5. For each nerve structure involved, multiply the grade of severity of the sensory and/or motor deficits (see step 3 above) by the appropriate maximum upper extremity impairment value (see step 4 above) to determine the upper extremity impairment percent for each function.
6.
For a structure with mixed motor and sensory fibers, determine the upper extremity impairment for each function (steps 1 through 5), then com- bine the sensory and motor impairment percents (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to obtain the total upper extremity impairment value.
7. When more than one nerve structure is involved, combine their respective upper extremity impair- ment values (steps 1 through 5) to obtain the total upper extremity impairment resulting from peripheral nerve disorders (Combined Values Chart).
8. When multiple impairments of the extremity are present because of amputation, loss of motion that is not strictly attributed to a peripheral nerve lesion, or peripheral vascular disorders, combine the peripheral nerve upper extremity impairment value with the other upper extremity impairment values (Combined Values Chart) to obtain the total upper extremity impairment.
9. The total upper extremity impairment is con- verted to a whole person impairment by means of Table 16-3.
10. If there is bilateral upper extremity involvement, determine separately the impairment values for each side, and convert them to whole person impairment. Combine the whole person impair- ment values for each side (Combined Values Chart) to obtain the total whole person impair- ment. Consult page 435 for further comments on bilateral upper extremity involvement.


Grading Sensory Deficits or Pain
A wide range of abnormal sensations may be associ- ated with peripheral nerve lesions, including dimin- ished sensation (anesthesia or hypesthesia), abnormal sensation (dysesthesia or paresthesia), and increased sensation (hyperesthesia). Another possible manifestation is pain of various types, including pain resulting from nonnoxious stimulus (allodynia), overreactive pain (hyperpathia), a state of dysesthetic pain (deafferentation), and, most significantly, the sustained, burning pain present in CRPS I (RSD)
and CRPS II (causalgia). Cold intolerance may also be present.


Sensory deficits or pain associated with peripheral nerve disorders are evaluated according to the fol- lowing criteria: (1) How does the sensory deficit or pain interfere with the individual’s performance of daily activities? (2) To what extent does the sensory deficit or pain follow the defined anatomic pathways of the spinal nerves, brachial plexus, or peripheral nerves? (3) To what extent is the description of the sensory deficit or pain consistent with characteristics of peripheral nerve disorders? (4) To what extent does the sensory deficit or pain correspond to other disturbances (motor, trophic, vasomotor, etc) of the involved nerve structure?

The methods for clinical assessment of sensibility are detailed in Section 16.3. In individuals with nerve lacerations, the presence of two-point discrimi- nation usually indicates significant return of func- tion. However, in conditions such as radiculitis, causalgia, and entrapment or compression neuropa- thy, normal two-point discrimination does not exclude the presence of abnormal light-touch/deep- pressure thresholds and abnormal conduction stud- ies. Conversely, the presence of a normal light-touch threshold does not necessarily indicate that two-point discrimination is normal in these cases. The use of the Semmes-Weinstein touch-pressure threshold monofilament test may be a helpful adjunct to the two-point discrimination test to help assess changes in light-touch sensibility.


Upper extremity impairments due to sensory deficits or pain resulting from peripheral nerve disorders are determined according to the grade of severity in diminution or loss of function and the relative maxi- mum upper extremity impairment value of the nerve structure involved, as shown in the classification
(a) and procedural (b) steps described in Table 16-10 and the impairment determination method detailed in Section 16.5b. Table 16-10 provides a classification for determining impairment of the upper extremity due to a sensory deficit or pain resulting from a nerve disorder. This table is to be used for pain that is due to nerve injury or disease that has been docu- mented with objective physical findings or electrodi- agnostic abnormalities. It is not to be used for pain in the distribution of a nerve that has not been injured except in diagnosed cases of complex regional pain syndromes. The examiner must use clinical judgment to estimate the appropriate percentage of sensory deficits or pain within the range of values shown for each severity grade. The maximum value for each grade is not applied automatically.


Adapted from Kline DG, Hudson AR. Operative Results for Major Nerve Injuries, Entrapments, and Tumors. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1995:89; Moberg E. Sensibility in reconstructive limb surgery. In: Fredericks S, Brody GS, eds. Symposium on the Neurologic Aspects of Plastic Surgery. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:30-35. Omer GE Jr, Bell-Krotoski J. Evaluation of clinical results following peripheral nerve suture. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, Van Beek AL, eds. Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems.
2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1998:340-349; Seddon HJ. Surgical Disorders of the Peripheral Nerves. 2nd ed. Edinburgh, Scotland: Churchill Livingstone; 1975; Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am.
1964;44:925-940; Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of permanent impairment in the hand and upper extremity. In: Doege TC, ed. Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment. Fourth ed. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1993.


Table 16-10a classifies the levels of functional sensi- bility based on the recommendations of Seddon, Moberg, Omer and Bell-Krotoski, and Kline and Hudson for assessment of sensory recovery, and Swanson’s grading of associated pain interference on activity. In interpretation of Table 16-10a, individuals in grade 4 have diminished light touch, with fair
(6-10 mm) to good two-point discrimination, local- ization of sensory stimuli, and good protective sensibility. Abnormal sensations or pain, if present, is minimal and forgotten during activity. Individuals in grade 3 have diminished light touch and two-point discrimination. There is mislocalization of sensory stimuli with some abnormal or increased irritability sensations or pain that interferes with activities.
Protective sensibility is normal. Individuals in grade 2 have decreased protective sensibility, which is defined as a conscious appreciation of pain, tempera- ture, or pressure before tissue damage results from the stimulus. They have diminished hand function.
The mislocalization and overresponse (hyperesthesia or paresthesia, hyperpathia, or allodynia) to sensory stimuli result in decreased manipulative skills and gripping function and complaints of hand weakness. It is possible to have a gross appreciation of two- point discrimination (11-15 mm) at this level.
Individuals in grade 1 have no protective sensibility, have little use of the hand, cannot manipulate objects outside their line of vision, and have a tendency to injure themselves easily. However, they can feel a pinprick and have deep-pressure sensibility, and they are not totally asensory. Pain and/or overresponse can be severe. Grade 0 represents an asensory hand with severe pain and overreactive responses and no functional usage.

Note that with the sole exception of CRPS I/RSD, Table 16-10a is exclusively used for cases presenting a documented sensory or mixed nerve involvement. In the absence of CRPS, sensory impairments strictly due to digital nerve lesions are evaluated according to Section 16.3.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-57


Exam: One year after a closed injury to the distal forearm, an individual continues to complain of vague pain and some numbness over the radial side of the dorsum of the hand, which is annoying but does not interfere with activity. The physical examination documents hypesthesia in the distri- bution of the superficial dorsal branch of the radial nerve and a positive percussion test over the point of nerve injury.
Analysis:
1. Nerve involved: superficial dorsal branch of the radial nerve (Table 16-12 and Figure 16-48).
2. Severity of sensory deficit: grade 4, ranging between 1% and 25% (Table 16-10a). On the basis of clinical judgment, 20% severity was selected.
3. Maximum impairment of the upper extremity due to sensory deficits or pain of the radial nerve: 5% (Table 16-15).
4. Multiply the grade of severity, 20% (step 2), by the maximum upper extremity impairment value for sensory deficit of the nerve involved, 5% (step 3), to obtain the upper extremity impairment value.
Impairment Rating: 20% ? 5% = 1% of the upper extremity, or 1% of the whole person (Table 16-3).


Grading Motor Deficits and Loss of Power Involvement of the peripheral nerve system struc- tures may lead to paralysis or weakness of the mus- cles they supply and/or to characteristic sensory changes. Clinical examination of the upper extremity demands precise anatomic knowledge to properly select the muscle tests that correlate to the specific nerve structure(s) involved (Table 16-12). Some muscles display a dual or variable pattern of nerve supply and require special consideration.


The manual grading of muscle strength is based on the ability of a normal muscle to contract and move a bone-joint lever arm through its full active range of motion with full resistance. Palpation of the muscle- tendon unit helps evaluate muscle contractility. Other than amplitude and strength, factors in muscle func- tion that should be considered and recorded include endurance, speed of contraction, and independence of action of individual muscles, especially those with associated function, such as the flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor digitorum profundus. Both upper extremities should be tested and the results compared.

The relaxed muscle should be palpated to identify fibrosis or painful areas that could limit excursion. Trick movements must be detected. If there is ques- tionable motor activity based on either pain or sus- pected anastomotic variations, use of a local anesthetic to block either the pain point or competing innervation may assist the examiner in evaluating function. Muscle strength testing is voluntary in that it requires full individual concentration and coopera- tion. It remains somewhat subjective until precise methods of measuring muscle contractions become generally available. Muscle atrophy, although not rated separately, can be a more objective sign of motor dysfunction. Electromyographic studies can help confirm motor function of specific muscles or groups of muscles.


Upper extremity impairments due to motor deficits and loss of power resulting from peripheral nerve disorders are determined according to the grade of severity of loss of function and the relative maximum upper extremity impairment value of the nerve struc- ture involved, as shown in the classification (a) and procedural (b) steps described in Table 16-11 and the impairment determination method detailed in Section
16.5b. The examiner must use clinical judgment to estimate the appropriate percentage of motor deficits and loss of power within the range of values shown for each severity grade. It is important to ascertain that weakness is due to loss of nerve function before using these tables. Weakness may be due to many causes, including pain, and Table 16-11 is not to be used for rating weakness that is not due to a diag- nosed injury of a specific nerve or nerves. A diagno- sis of nerve injury can usually be made by a careful physical examination done by an examiner who has sufficient knowledge of the anatomy and function of the part. If there is doubt about the presence of a nerve injury, electromyographic studies may be


Adapted from Lovett RW. From Omer GE Jr, Bell-Krotoski J. Evaluation of clinical results following peripheral nerve suture. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, Van Beek AL, eds.
Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1998:341; Seddon HJ. Surgical Disorders of the Peripheral Nerves. 2nd ed. Edinburgh, Scotland: Churchill Livingstone; 1975; Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of permanent impairment in the hand and upper extremity. In: Doege TC, ed. Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment. Fourth ed. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1993.


necessary in order to confirm the diagnosis. Note that grade 4 covers a wide range of weakness, from minimal detectable weakness to severe weakness in which the muscles are functional through a full range with only very slight resistance. The degree of weak- ness should be rated from 1% to 25% depending on the degree within this grade.

Loss of strength relating to conditions not resulting from peripheral nerve disorders is discussed in Section 16.8. The evaluator should not apply impairment values from both sections to the same condition.


Modified from Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of permanent impairment in the hand and upper extremity. In: Engelberg AL, ed. Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment. Third ed. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1988.


Modified from Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of permanent impairment in the hand and upper extremity. In: Engelberg AL, ed. Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment. Third ed. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1988.


From Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of permanent impairment in the hand and upper extremity. In: Doege TC, ed. Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment. Fourth ed. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1993.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-58

Exam: An individual sustained a dislocation of the right shoulder, which was reduced to its anatomic position as seen on roentgenograms. However, some loss of muscle strength persisted despite an appropriate course of rehabilitation and sufficient time for maximal recovery. While in a standing position with the arm placed alongside the body and the elbow flexed, the individual could actively abduct and elevate the upper arm from 90° to 180° against gravity and slight resistance. There was some hypesthesia of the skin over the lower two thirds of the deltoid muscle that did not inter- fere with activity. The estimated impairment should take into consideration the motor and sen- sory deficits.

Analysis:
Sensory deficit calculation:
1. Cutaneous dermatome involved: lateral brachial cutaneous nerve (terminal sensory branch of the axillary nerve) (Table 16-12 and Figure 16-48).
2. Severity of sensory deficit or pain: grade 4 (1%-25%) (Table 16-10a). A severity grading of 15% was selected on clinical judgment.
3. Maximum upper extremity impairment result- ing from sensory deficit of the sensory branch of the axillary nerve: 5% (Table 16-15).
4. Multiply the maximum upper extremity impair- ment for sensory deficit of the axillary nerve sensory branch (5%) by the severity of sensory deficit (15%) to obtain the impairment of the upper extremity due to sensory deficit of the axillary nerve terminal sensory branch, or
5% ? 15% = 0.75%, which is rounded to 1%.


(Radial nerve, C5-C8)


	(Supraclavicular nerve C3, C4)

(Axillary nerve C5, C6) Superior lateral brachial cutaneous

Intercostobrachial
	(T1-T2) and
medial brachial cutaneous (T1)


Medial antebrachial cutaneous (C8, T1)
(Musculocutaneous nerve, C5-C7) Lateral antebrachial cutaneous
(Ulnar nerve, C8, T1)


(Radial nerve C5–C8)

Posterior brachial cutaneous
Inferior lateral
	 brachial
cutaneous

Posterior
	 antebrachial
cutaneous

16.5c Regional Impairment Determination Impairment of the peripheral nerve system may involve the structures listed below. The impairment determination method is detailed step by step in Section 16.5b.

• Spinal nerves C5 to C8 and T1
• Brachial plexus
• Major peripheral nerves

Spinal Nerves
Evaluating impairment of the spinal nerves due to injuries or disease is based on the severity of loss of function of the peripheral nerves receiving fibers from specific spinal nerves. Because each spinal nerve transmits fibers to more than one peripheral nerve, the loss of function is greater with the involve- ment of two or more spinal nerves transmitting fibers

superficial branch

(Median nerve, C6-C8, T1)
Palmar cutaneous
Palmar	 digitals

Palmar cutaneous

Palmar digitals

Dorsal cutaneous
Dorsal   digitals

Palmar digitals

Superficial
and dorsal digitals


(Median nerve, C6-C8, T1)
Palmar digitals

to the same peripheral nerve than with the involve- ment of a single spinal nerve. Therefore, in multiple spinal nerve involvement, the impairment is evalu- ated according to the brachial plexus values (Table 16-14) rather than combining the individual spinal nerve values shown in Table 16-13.


Adapted with permission from an original painting by F. H. Netter In: The Atlas of Human Anatomy. Summit, NJ: CIBA-GEIGY Corp; 1989.


Motor deficit calculation:
1. Muscle involved: deltoid, which is innervated by the axillary nerve (Table 16-12 and Figure 16-47).
2. Severity of motor deficit: grade 4 (1%-25%) (Table 16-11a). A severity rating of 25% was selected on clinical judgment because of the severity of the weakness.
3. Maximum upper extremity impairment due to motor deficit of the axillary nerve: 35% (Table 16-15).
4. Multiply the maximum upper extremity impair- ment for motor deficit of the axillary nerve (35%) by the severity of motor deficit (25%) to obtain the impairment of the upper extremity due to motor deficit of the axillary nerve, or 35% ? 25% = 9%.
Impairment Rating: Combined sensory and motor deficits: Combine 9% upper extremity motor deficit with 1% upper extremity sensory deficit (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to obtain 10% upper extremity impairment resulting from axil- lary nerve dysfunction. This corresponds to 6% whole person impairment (Table 16-3).

For example, the maximum upper extremity impair- ment due to combined motor and sensory deficits resulting from a lesion of the upper trunk (C5 and C6) is 81% (Table 16-14); however, combining the impairment values of the individual nerves C5 (34%) and C6 (40%), as shown in Table 16-13, results in 60% upper extremity impairment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604), which does not reflect the full sever- ity of loss of function.

Table 16-13 provides maximum upper extremity impairment values for unilateral sensory and motor deficits of the spinal nerves that are most frequently involved. A spinal nerve–related impairment is deter- mined according to the method detailed in Section
16.5b. Impairment of a specific spinal nerve that is not mentioned in this section should be estimated by considering the percents suggested for a nerve that has fibers from the specific spinal nerve. Bilateral involvements are discussed in the Impairment Determination Method (Section 16.5b), step 10.


Brachial Plexus
The brachial plexus innervates the shoulder girdle and upper extremity and is formed by the anterior primary divisions of the fifth through eighth cervical roots and the first thoracic root. These roots anasto- mose to form three primary trunks: upper trunk (C5 and C6), middle trunk (C7), and lower trunk (C8 and T1) (Figure 16-50). Specific findings result from the involvement of these structures.


* See Table 16-10a to grade sensory deficit or pain.

† See Table 16-11a to grade motor deficit.

From Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of permanent impairment in the hand and upper extremity. In: Doege TC, ed. Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment. Fourth ed. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1993.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-59

Exam: A 42-year-old man fell 30 feet and landed on his upper back. He complained of neck pain radiating down his right arm. Sixteen months later, after a maximum medical rehabilitation pro- gram and an optimal period for physiologic recov- ery, an examination disclosed a 20% sensory deficit in the C5 area and 50% loss of power of the muscles innervated by C5. These losses were stable and determined as permanent impairments.
Analysis:
1. Sensory deficit impairment: 20% (sensory deficit severity) ? 5% (maximum upper extremity impairment for sensory deficit of C5) (Table 16-13) = 1% impairment of the upper extremity.
2. Motor deficit impairment: 50% (motor deficit severity) ? 30% (maximum upper extremity impairment for motor deficit of C5) (Table 16-13) = 15% impairment of the upper extremity.
Impairment Rating: Combine 1% sensory deficit with 15% motor deficit (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to obtain 16% impairment of the upper extremity, which is 10% impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3).

Total brachial plexus paralysis is manifested by flail arm, paralysis of all muscles of the hand, and no sen- sibility. Sudorific function is intact when the lesion is preganglionic.

In upper trunk paralysis (C5, C6, Erb-Duchenne), the arm hangs in adduction and internal rotation with the elbow in extension and the forearm in pronation; the biceps, deltoid, brachialis, supraspinatus, infra- spinatus, and rhomboid muscles are paralyzed; the triceps, pectoralis major, and extensor carpi radialis brevis and longus muscles are weak; most finger movements are intact; biceps reflex is absent; and a sensory deficit in the C5 and C6 dermatomes is pres- ent (Figure 16-49).

Lower trunk paralysis (C8, T1, Déjerine-Klumpke) is manifested by paralysis of all intrinsic muscles of the hand; weakness of the flexor carpi ulnaris and flexor digitorum profundus of the little finger; Horner syndrome (ptosis, myosis, enophthalmos) if the T1 root is avulsed from the spinal cord; and a sensory deficit of the C8 and T1 dermatomes (Figure 16-49).

Table 16-14 provides maximum upper extremity impairment values resulting from unilateral sensory or motor deficits of the brachial plexus, or to com- bined deficits. A brachial plexus–related impairment is determined according to the method described in Section 16.5b.


Source: Netter FH. The Atlas of Human Anatomy. Summit, NJ: CIBA-GEIGY Corp; 1989.


Figure 16-50 The Brachial Plexus


Musculocutaneous


   Lateral pectoral Axillary

Suprascapular	Dorsal scapular

 C4 C5
C6


Radial Median
Ulnar


C7
C8

Medial	T1
pectoral

Thoracdorsal
Superior and


Medial brachial cutaneous

Long thoracic

Inferior subscapular	Medial antebrachial
cutaneous


* See Table 16-10a to grade sensory deficit or pain.

† See Table 16-11a to grade motor deficit.

From Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of permanent impairment in the hand and upper extremity. In: Doege TC, ed. Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Imapirment. Fourth ed. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Assocation; 1993.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-60
Exam: A 22-year-old man was driving a pickup truck that flipped over during a crash. Days later the man could not move his left arm. After a period of months, he had recovered hand and forearm function but had total paralysis along the C5 and C6 root distribution. As a result of grafts from C5 and C6 to truncal divisions, he was par- tially recovered within 4 years.
Analysis: In the C5 and C6 distributions, the motor function of individual muscles was graded as fol- lows: supraspinatus, 4; infraspinatus, 3; deltoid, 3; biceps brachialis, 4; brachioradialis, 3; and supina- tor, 3. Table 16-12 and Figure 16-47 describe the motor nerves of the upper extremity.
The whole person impairment was derived from the following:
1. Supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles (suprascapular nerve, C5-6): a motor function grade of 4 was estimated to be 25% motor deficit (Table 16-11a). The maximum upper extremity impairment for motor deficit of the suprascapular nerve is 16% (Table 16-15). The upper extremity impairment was estimated to be 25% ? 16%, or 4%.
2. Deltoid muscle (axillary nerve, C5-6): a motor function grade of 3 was estimated to be 50% motor deficit (Table 16-11a). The maximum upper extremity impairment for motor deficit of the axillary nerve is 35% (Table 16-15). The upper extremity impairment was estimated to be 50% ? 35% or, rounding off, 18%.
3. Biceps brachialis muscle (musculocutaneous nerve, C5-6): a motor function grade of 4 rep- resented 25% motor deficit (Table 16-11a). The maximum upper extremity impairment for motor deficit of the musculocutaneous nerve is 25% (Table 16-15). The upper extremity impairment was estimated to be 25% ? 25%, or 6%.
4. Brachioradialis and supinator muscles (radial nerve C5-6): a motor function grade of 3 was estimated to be 40% motor deficit (Table 16- 11a). The maximum upper extremity impair- ment for motor deficit of the radial nerve with sparing of the triceps is 35% (Table 16-15). The upper extremity impairment was estimated to be 40% ? 35%, or 14%.

Impairment Rating: The upper extremity motor deficit impairments are combined by means of the Combined Values Chart (p. 604): 4% combined with 18% is 21%, 21% combined with 6% is 26%,
and 26% combined with 14% is 36%. The total impairment of the upper extremity is 36%, which represents 22% whole person impairment (Table 16-3).


Major Peripheral Nerves
The sensory and motor innervation of the upper extremity is shown in Figures 16-47 through 16-50 and in Table 16-12. Table 16-15 shows the maximum upper extremity impairment resulting from sensory and/or motor deficits of the major peripheral nerves most frequently involved.

Impairment due to involvement of major peripheral nerves is derived according to the method described in Section 16.5b. An example of mixed peripheral nerve impairment is given in Example 16-58, based on the individual who sustained a shoulder disloca- tion followed by axillary nerve deficits.


16.5d Entrapment/Compression Neuropathy
Entrapment neuropathy is a nerve compression–type lesion that implies disproportion between the volume of the peripheral nerve and the space through which it passes. The underlying causes may be intrinsic or extrinsic, in that the nerve itself or the other contents of the passage may be enlarged or the passage space may be narrowed. The differential diagnosis of entrapment neuropathy is extensive. The local causes can relate to specific anatomic variations in the con- figuration of bones or soft tissue resulting from chronic irritation or an inflammatory process such as tenosynovitis; mechanical causes such as blunt trauma, fractures, or scarring; or congenital anom- alies such as aberrant muscles, arteries, or a cervical rib in the thoracic outlet region. Neoplastic condi- tions, such as myeloma or neurofibromatosis, or space-occupying lesions, such as ganglion, lipoma, or fibroma, must be ruled out. Predisposing or associated conditions can include diabetes, arthritis, alcoholism, renal disease, hormonal changes, malnutrition, or obesity.


* See Table 16-10a to grade sensory deficits or pain.

† See Table 16-11a to grade motor deficits.

* From Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of permanent impairment in the hand and upper extremity. In: Doege TC, ed. Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment.
Fourth ed. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1993.


Peripheral nerves can become compressed at any level from the hand to the thoracocervical region. One nerve can be trapped simultaneously at two lev- els, or more than one nerve can be trapped. Certain anatomic constraints make particular nerves at spe- cific sites more vulnerable, leading to well-defined patterns or syndromes. Generally, each nerve lesion can be described clinically as a high or a low lesion, that is, a high or a low median, radial, or ulnar lesion. The most frequently encountered entrapment is of the median nerve at the wrist, leading to the carpal tunnel syndrome, followed by the ulnar nerve at the elbow. The recurrent motor branch of the median nerve can be involved singly or in combina- tion with the median nerve at the wrist. Knowledge

of normal and variant anatomy, both gross and microscopic, is essential for accurate diagnosis and precise localization of the lesion.


Diagnosis of Entrapment/Compression Neuropathy
The diagnosis of entrapment/compression neuropa- thy is based on (1) the history and symptoms;
(2) objective clinical signs and findings on detailed examination; and (3) documentation by electroneu- romyographic studies. Standard roentgenograms and more involved imaging studies are also useful.


The history should include a listing of occupation(s), activities of daily living, factors that alleviate or aggravate the symptoms, medical conditions, and past surgical procedures or trauma. The entrapment of a major peripheral nerve or one of its branches is reflected by a disturbance of a specific motor, sen- sory, or autonomic function. Functionally, the symp- toms may vary from slight paresthesia, motor weakness, or both to complete sensibility loss, mus- cle paralysis, or both. The severity of the nerve dam- age and symptoms depends on the duration, magnitude, and type of compression as well as on the microanatomy of the nerve involved.

The physical examination evaluates sensibility alter- ations, muscle power, range of motion, grip strength, and tendon reflexes. Increased pressure over an entrapped nerve, or its irritation by tapping or stretch- ing, is reflected by paresthesia (sensation of electrical shock) in its autonomous zone and possibly by limita- tion of motion because of pain. Individuals with com- pression neuropathies show different patterns of loss and recovery than individuals with lacerations. They may have normal two-point discrimination but abnor- mal light-touch/deep-pressure recognition. Semmes- Weinstein monofilament testing can be indicated in these cases. Provocative tests are helpful to induce clinical symptoms; these include, for example, the tourniquet, Phalen’s or reverse Phalen’s, elbow flex- ion, and Adson’s tests. Nerve percussion tests are per- formed distal to proximal and then directly over the area of a sensitive cutaneous or major mixed nerve.
Testing of Tinel’s sign should be reserved for regener- ating nerves to document the progress and speed of axon regeneration after repair of a lacerated nerve or decompression of a severely compressed nerve.

The electroneurodiagnostic examination includes electromyographic (needle and cutaneous) examina- tions, which evaluate only motor unit potentials, and motor and sensory nerve conduction studies. These procedures assess only the largest, most heavily myelinated axons; the lightly myelinated and unmyelinated axons that transmit pain are not directly evaluated. A fundamental point is that, regardless of the cause of nerve damage, the electro- diagnostic studies essentially can detect only two types of pathophysiology of the peripheral nerve sys- tem fibers: (1) axon loss (axonotmetic lesion), which is manifested as conduction failure, and (2) focal demyelination (neuropraxic lesion), which can cause either conduction slowing or conduction block, depending on the severity of the process. The sever- ity of conduction slowing has no correlation with the severity of clinical symptoms, such as weakness or static large-fiber sensory loss. If these are present, substantial amounts of either conduction block, axon loss, or a combination of both must be present.

Impairment Rating of Entrapment/Compression Neuropathies Only individuals with an objectively verifiable diag-
nosis should qualify for a permanent impairment rat- ing. The diagnosis is made not only on believable symptoms but, more important, on the presence of positive clinical findings and loss of function. The diagnosis should be documented by electromyogra- phy as well as sensory and motor nerve conduction studies. However, it is critical to understand that there is no correlation between the severity of con- duction delay on nerve conduction velocity testing and the severity of either symptoms or, more impor- tant, impairment rating. The surgical findings of evi- dence of nerve compression and reactive hyperemia upon nerve release help confirm the diagnosis.

Postoperatively, a sufficient amount of time for opti- mal physiologic recovery and rehabilitation should elapse before an individual qualifies for permanent impairment rating should there be residual symptoms or clinical findings. Factors affecting nerve recovery in compression lesions include nerve fiber pathology, level of injury, duration of injury, and status of the end organs. Age is not a prognostic factor. Sensory function usually returns before motor function. High axonotmetic lesions may take 1 to 2 years for maxi- mal recovery, whereas even lesions at the wrist may take 6 to 9 months for maximal recovery of nerve function. During the recovery time, individuals can experience some of the preoperative symptoms. An advancing Tinel’s sign can be monitored and is a good prognostic sign.


The sensory deficits or pain, and/or the motor deficits and loss of power, are evaluated according to the impairment determination method described in Section 16.5b. Sensory impairments strictly due to lesions of digital nerves are evaluated according to Section 16.3. In compression neuropathies, addi- tional impairment values are not given for decreased grip strength. In the absence of CRPS, additional impairment values are not given for decreased motion. In the presence of associated CRPS II (causalgia), the compression neuropathy is evaluated according to the principles of CRPS II described in Section 16.5e.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-61
History: A 30-year-old forest ranger fell in the woods and sustained a severe laceration on the medial side of the left elbow. Medical care was not immediately accessible. Surgical exploration 20 hours after injury showed wound contamina- tion with foreign material and an exposed but not visibly damaged ulnar nerve. Despite appropriate antibiotic therapy, the man developed a wound infection that required operative debridements, followed ultimately by delayed primary closure. Symptoms of ulnar nerve dysfunction first appeared during the time of active infection and progressively increased over 3 weeks. Despite considerable difficulties, he refused surgical intervention.
Current Symptoms: One year later, back at work as a forest ranger, the man complains of burning pain and numbness on the medial side of the forearm radiating to the left little finger and ulnar half of the ring finger, which prevents repetitive and heavy work. He also reports hand weakness
and clumsiness.
Physical Exam: Healed scar over the medial aspect of the left elbow; normal range of motion of all joints of the extremity; difficulty in crossing and snapping the fingers; loss of synchronism of MP and IP joint flexion (MP joint did not flex until all IP joint flexion was completed); atrophy of the hypothenar eminence and of the interosseous muscles; skin atrophy and decreased fingerprint pattern involving the little finger; two-point dis- crimination greater than 20 mm with no sharp- dull discrimination in the little finger and ulnar half of the ring finger; positive percussion test

over ulnar nerve on medial side of elbow; and no muscle function in the flexor carpi ulnaris, flexor digitorum profundus to the little finger, adductor pollicis, or hypothenar eminence on manual testing.
Clinical Studies: Radiograms were negative, both initially and at follow-up. Complete loss of sen- sory and motor function in the ulnar nerve distal to the elbow were confirmed by electrodiagnostic studies.
Diagnosis: Ulnar nerve entrapment at the elbow sec- ondary to scarring.

Analysis:
Sensory deficit calculation:
1. Severity of sensory deficit or pain: 100% (grade 0) (Table 16-10a).
2. Maximum upper extremity impairment due to sensory deficit of the ulnar nerve (above mid- forearm): 7% (Table 16-15).
3. Multiply the maximum upper extremity impair- ment for sensory deficit of the ulnar nerve (7%) by the severity of sensory deficit (100%) to obtain impairment of the upper extremity due to sensory deficit of the ulnar nerve, or 7%.
Motor deficit calculation:
1. Severity of motor deficit: 100% (grade 0) (Table 16-11a).
2. Maximum upper extremity impairment due to motor deficit of the ulnar nerve (above mid- forearm): 46% (Table 16-15).
3. Multiply the maximum upper extremity impair- ment for motor deficit of the ulnar nerve (46%) by the severity of motor deficit (100%) to obtain impairment of the upper extremity due to motor deficit of the ulnar nerve, or 46%.
Impairment Rating: Combine 7% upper extremity sensory deficit with 46% upper extremity motor deficit (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to obtain 50% upper extremity impairment resulting from ulnar nerve dysfunction. Note that the maximum upper extremity impairment value (50%) due to combined complete motor and sensory deficits of the ulnar nerve is also listed in the far right column of Table 16-15. 50% upper extremity impairment corresponds to 30% whole person impairment (Table 16-3).


Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
The carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is the most com- mon of nerve compression lesions and involves the median nerve at the volar aspect of the wrist. There are many presentations of CTS. Pain and paresthe- sias in the median nerve distribution of the hand are the usual symptoms. Pain may radiate proximally. Nocturnal paresthesias, relieved by shaking the hand, are frequently reported and can be the only symptom in the earliest stages of nerve pathology. True sen- sory disturbances and muscle atrophy represent later stages, when axonotmesis with axonal degeneration is also present. The symptoms, signs, and findings may include sensory or autonomic disturbances of the radial 31/2 digits, weakness or atrophy of the thenar muscles, a positive percussion sign at the wrist, presence of Phalen’s sign, and motor and sensory electroneuromyographic abnormalities. Not all symptoms are necessarily present in any one case. In isolated involvement of the recurrent branch of the median nerve, there is weakness of thumb abduction and thenar atrophy without any sensory disturbance in the hand. Sensitivity to cold may be a major pre- senting symptom of CTS. Certain cases may be asso- ciated with reflex dystrophy (CRPS I). It has also been reported that 5% of individuals with CTS may have normal electrophysiologic studies.

If, after an optimal recovery time following surgical decompression, an individual continues to complain of pain, paresthesias, and/or difficulties in perform- ing certain activities, three possible scenarios can be present:

1. Positive clinical findings of median nerve dys- function and electrical conduction delay(s): the impairment due to residual CTS is rated according to the sensory and/or motor deficits as described earlier.
2. Normal sensibility and opposition strength with abnormal sensory and/or motor latencies or abnormal EMG testing of the thenar muscles: a residual CTS is still present, and an impairment rating not to exceed 5% of the upper extremity may be justified.
3. Normal sensibility (two-point discrimination and Semmes-Weinstein monofilament testing), opposi- tion strength, and nerve conduction studies: there is no objective basis for an impairment rating.

16.5e Complex Regional Pain Syndromes (CRPS), Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy (CRPS I), and Causalgia (CRPS II)
The hallmark of these syndromes is a characteristic burning pain that is present without stimulation or movement, that occurs beyond the territory of a sin- gle peripheral nerve, and that is disproportionate to the inciting event. The pain is associated with spe- cific clinical findings, including signs of vasomotor and sudomotor dysfunction and, later, trophic changes of all tissues from skin to bone.

Sympathetic nervous system dysfunction was thought to be involved in the generation of the symp- toms and signs; hence, the term reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD). Causalgia was considered similar to RSD except, unlike RSD, it followed a lesion of a peripheral nerve, either of a major mixed nerve in the proximal extremity (major causalgia) or of a purely sensory branch more distally (minor causalgia). A recent reconsideration of these syndromes has gener- ated new terminology and ideas concerning the underlying pathophysiology. The International Association for the Study of Pain has proposed the term complex regional pain syndromes, which has replaced the term RSD with CRPS I and causalgia with CRPS II. The most important difference from earlier opinions is that sympathetic dysfunction is not assumed to be the underlying basis for the symp- toms and signs of CRPS. It is felt that sympatheti- cally maintained pain is not an essential component of CRPS, as it may be present in a variety of painful conditions, including or independent of CRPS. Contrary to previous suggestions, regional sympa- thetic blockade has no role in the diagnosis of CRPS.


Since a subjective complaint of pain is the hallmark of these conditions, and many of the associated physi- cal signs and radiologic findings can be the result of disuse, the differential diagnosis is extensive; it includes somatoform pain disorder, somatoform con- version disorder, factitious disorder, and malingering. Consequently, the approach to the diagnosis of these syndromes should be conservative and based on objective findings. The criteria listed in Table 16-16 predicate a diagnosis of CRPS upon a preponderance of objective findings that can be identified during a standard physical examination and demonstrated by radiologic techniques. At least eight of these findings must be present concurrently for a diagnosis of CRPS. Signs are objective evidence of disease per- ceptible to the examiner, as opposed to symptoms, which are subjective sensations of the individual.


Modified from Ensalada LH. Complex regional pain syndrome. In: Brigham CR, ed.
The Guides Casebook. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1999:14.

CRPS I (RSD) Impairment Determination
In CRPS I, neither the initiating causative factor nor the symptoms involve a specific peripheral nerve structure or territory. The impairment determination is derived as follows:

1. Rate the upper extremity impairment resulting from loss of motion of each individual joint involved (Section 16.4).
2. Rate the upper extremity impairment resulting from sensory deficits and pain according to the grade that best describes the severity of interfer- ence with activities of daily living as described in Table 16-10a. Use clinical judgment to select the appropriate severity grade and the appropriate percentage from within the range shown in each grade. The maximum value is not automatically applied. The value selected represents the upper extremity impairment. A nerve value multiplier is not used.
3. Combine the upper extremity value for loss of joint motion (step 1) and pain and sensory deficits (step 2) to determine the upper extremity impair- ment due to CRPS I (Combined Values Chart,
p. 604).
4. Convert the upper extremity impairment to whole person impairment by using Table 16-3.

In contrast to CRPS II, impairment values for sen- sory and motor deficits of a specific nerve structure cannot be applied. No additional impairment is assigned for decreased pinch or grasp strength. The impairment rating method described for sensory deficits due to lesions of digital nerves is not applied in CRPS.

CRPS II (Causalgia) Impairment Determination
In CRPS II, a specific sensory or mixed nerve struc- ture is involved. The impairment determination is derived as follows:

1. Rate the upper extremity impairment due to loss of motion of each individual joint involved (Section 16.4).
2. Rate the upper extremity impairment resulting from sensory deficits and pain of the injured nerves according to the determination methods described in Section 16.5b and Table 16-10a. Use clinical judgment to select the appropriate severity grade and the appropriate percentage from within the range shown in each grade.


3. Rate the upper extremity impairment resulting from motor deficits and loss of power of the injured nerve according to the determination method described in Section 16.5b and Table 16-11a.
4. Combine the upper extremity impairment percents for loss of joint motion (step 1), pain and sensory deficits (step 2), and motor deficits (step 3), if present, to determine the upper extremity impair- ment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604). Severe CRPS II may result in complete loss of function and in impairment of the extremity as great as 100%.
5. Convert the upper extremity impairment to whole person impairment by using Table 16-3.

No additional impairment is given for decreased pinch or grip strength. The impairment rating method described for sensory deficits resulting from lesions of digital nerves is not applied in CRPS.


16.6 Impairment of the Upper Extremities Due to Vascular
     Disorders
The criteria for evaluating Raynaud’s phenomena and other extremity impairments due to peripheral vascu- lar disorders resulting from diseases of the arteries, veins, or lymphatics is discussed in Chapter 4, The Cardiovascular System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries, Section 4.3.

Table 16-17 provides a similar classification of impairments due to peripheral vascular disease. Physical signs of vascular damage must be present and are the primary determinants in placing the examinee into one of these categories. Raynaud’s phenomenon consists of localized blanching of one or more fingers, followed by a period of cyanosis, followed by erythema. Pain on exposure to cold or generalized paleness of the fingers on exposure to cold does not in itself indicate Raynaud’s phenome- non. When amputation because of peripheral vascu- lar disease is involved, the impairment resulting from amputation should be evaluated according to Section
16.2 and combined with the appropriate value in Table 16-17 by means of the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

It is important to differentiate symptoms of Raynaud’s phenomenon on the basis of obstructive physiology from those occurring because of vasore- activity. Individuals with obstructive physiology will often experience symptoms more frequently and with a greater degree of severity. Establish the presence of obstructive physiology by objective testing. Arterial pressure ratios between the affected digits and the brachial pressure (finger/brachial index) are easily performed. A ratio of < 0.8 suggests obstructive physiology, even if Raynaud’s symptoms are not present. Obstructive physiology can also be estab- lished by the use of cutaneous laser Doppler flowme- try. This technique is established and can reliably assess microcirculation performance and real-time changes in skin blood flow.

Impairment of 0% to 9% is indicated by documented Raynaud’s phenomenon with obstructive physiology (as documented by finger-brachial indices of less than 0.8 or low digital temperatures with decreased laser Doppler signals that do not normalize with warming of affected digits) that completely responds to lifestyle changes and/or medical therapy.

Impairment of 10% to 39% is indicated by symp- toms of Raynaud’s phenomenon with obstructive physiology (as documented by finger-brachial indices of less than 0.8 or low digital temperatures with decreased laser Doppler signals that do not nor- malize with warming of affected digits) that incom- pletely responds to lifestyle changes and medical therapy.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-62


Exam: A 45-year-old woman had had Raynaud’s phe- nomenon from scleroderma for 9 years. She had incomplete healing of finger ulcerations with con- servative measures and prazosin hydrochloride.
Physical examination showed ulcerations on the tips of the index and ring fingers of the right hand. Autoamputation of the distal half of the distal pha- langes of the index and ring fingers on the left hand was noted. The finger/brachial ratio was 0.6, and laser Doppler signals were consistent with micro- circulatory impairment.


Analysis:
Left upper extremity: 55% impairment of the upper extremity (middle range of class 3) due to peripheral vascular disease; 5% of the upper extremity due to finger amputations (see Section 16.2 and Figure 16-5). Combining these values yields 57% impairment of the left upper extrem- ity, or 34% whole person impairment.

Right upper extremity: 25% of the upper extremity (middle range of class 2), or 15% whole person impairment.
Impairment Rating: Combining 34% with 15% gives 44% whole person impairment.
16.7
Impairment of the Upper Extremities Due to Other
     Disorders
Conditions not previously described that can con- tribute to impairments of the hand and upper extrem- ity include bone and joint disorders (Section 16.7a), presence of resection or implant arthroplasty (Section 16.7b), musculotendinous disorders (Section 16.7c), and tendinitis (Section 16.7d), and loss of strength (Section 16.8). The severity of impairment due to these disorders is rated separately according to Tables 16-19 through 16-30 and then multiplied by the rela- tive maximum value of the unit involved as specified in Table 16-18. Appropriate impairment percents are combined with other impairment percents by means of the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).


Table 16-18 shows the maximum values for the dig- its, hand, wrist, elbow, and shoulder resulting from the conditions described in this section and relates the percents to larger units and the whole person.
Note that the relative upper extremity impairment values for the shoulder, elbow, and wrist are the same for decreased motion (Section 16.4) and “other dis- orders” (Table 16-18) but differ from those for ampu- tation at similar levels (Table 16-4). The values for individual joints of both the thumb and fingers listed in Table 16-18 have been assigned on a 100% digit unit scale and differ from those listed for amputation (Table 16-4) and range of motion (Section 16.4).
The hand impairment value of each digit is the same throughout this entire chapter. If more than one
joint of a specific digit is affected by impairments due to “other disorders” listed in this section, the applicable joint impairment ratings are added only when the joints involved have a full range of motion. Otherwise, the joint impairment values are combined using the Combined Values Chart.


* Each value is related to the next larger units and the whole person


Skin disorders, including disfigurement, scars, and skin grafts, are evaluated using criteria in Chapter 8, The Skin.

Impairments from the disorders considered in this section under the category of “other disorders” are usually estimated by using other impairment evalua- tion criteria. The criteria described in this section should be used only when the other criteria have not adequately encompassed the extent of the impair- ments. Some of the conditions described in this sec- tion can be concurrent with each other and with decreased motion because they share overlapping pathomechanics. The evaluator must have good understanding of pathomechanics of deformities and apply proper judgment to avoid duplication of impairment ratings.

16.7a Bone and Joint Deformities
If the same unit presents several findings, the follow- ing rules must be followed to avoid duplication of impairments. In the digits, wrist, and elbow, manifes- tations of joint translocation can include lateral devi- ation, rotational deformity (digit), and/or subluxation or dislocation in any combination. The impairment values due to these findings cannot be combined, and only the finding with the highest impairment value is rated. Limited motion impairment is rated according to Section 16.4 and can be appropriately combined with impairments due to “other disorders” listed in this section, except with those due to joint swelling from synovial hypertrophy, persistent joint subluxa- tion or dislocation, and musculotendinous disorders (Section 16.7c). Joint instability impairment values can be combined with other appropriate impairment values, including decreased motion, but not with arthroplasty. Joint swelling due to synovial hypertro- phy is rated only when no other findings are present. Joint crepitation is not rated separately because other findings, such as those listed above, are more reliable indicators of the severity of the same arthritic process.


* Multiply by the relative value of the joint (Table 16-18) to determine the joint impairment.

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.

* Multiply by the relative hand value of the digit (Table 16-18) to determine the hand impairment.

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.


Joint Swelling Due to Synovial Hypertrophy Synovial hypertrophy is a sign of an inflammatory arthritic process that can progress through varying the manifestations listed above, including decreased motion. If synovial hypertrophy is the only finding, the joint impairment is rated according to Table 16- 19 and multiplied by the relative maximum value of the joint involved (Table 16-18). It cannot be com- bined with impairment due to decreased joint motion or other findings.


Digit Lateral Deviation
The deviation from longitudinal alignment of each of the digital joints is measured in degrees during maxi- mum active extension. Since lateral deviation at any level affects the longitudinal arch of the digit, the deviation impairment value is applied to the entire digit. If lateral deviation is the only impairment, the severity of digit impairment (Table 16-20) is multi- plied by the relative hand value of the digit (Table
16-18) to determine the hand impairment. The lateral deviation impairment percent can be combined with other impairments of the same digits, including motion, according to the rules outlined on page 499 (Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-63


Exam: 35° ulnar deviation at the PIP joint of the lit- tle finger after a ligamentous injury. Range of motion at that joint is 20° extension lag through 30° flexion.
Analysis: Ulnar deviation is classified as “severe” and corresponds to 30% (Table 16-20).
Motion impairment of the little finger PIP joint: IE% = 7%; IF% = 42% (Figure 16-23);
7% + 42% = 49% motion impairment.
Impairment Rating: From the Combined Values Chart (p. 604), 49% combined with 30% is 64% impairment of the little finger, which is consid- ered to be 6% impairment of the hand and 5% impairment of the upper extremity (Tables 16-2 and 16-3).


Digit Rotational Deformity
Rotational deformity of any segment of a digit can result either from rotational malalignment of a metacarpal or phalanx following a fracture or from imbalances of the joint as often seen in rheumatoid arthritis (eg, pronation deformity of the index finger). Rotational deformity of the distal, middle, or proxi- mal phalanx is measured during maximum active flexion of the digit. Malrotation of the normal axial alignment of any segment of a digit in either prona- tion or supination affects the function of the entire digit, and the impairment percent is applied to the entire (100%) digit value.

The digit impairment percent due to rotational defor- mity (Table 16-21) is multiplied by the relative hand value of the digit (Table 16-18) to obtain the hand impairment. The rotational deformity impairment can be combined with other impairments of the same digit, including motion, according to the rules out- lined on page 499.


* Multiply the relative hand value of the digit (Table 16-18) to determine the hand impairment percent.

Adapted from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.


* Multiply by the relative value of the joint (Table 16-18) to determine the joint impairment.

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-64

Exam: A 20° pronation deformity of the index finger is present after a healed fracture of the second metacarpal.
Analysis: According to Table 16-21, this is a “mod- erate” deformity and corresponds to 40% digit impairment. Relative value of the entire index fin- ger to the hand is 20% (Table 16-18).
Impairment Rating: Hand impairment is 40% ? 20% = 8%; this is equivalent to 7% impairment of the upper extremity (Table 16-2).

Persistent Joint Subluxation or Dislocation Persistent joint subluxation or dislocation usually results in restricted motion. If there is no restricted motion, the values shown in Table 16-22 are multi- plied by the relative value of the joint (Table 16-18) to determine the joint impairment. If the same joint pres- ents other findings, the rules outlined on page 499 must be followed to avoid duplication of impairments.

Instability and translocation of the wrist and shoulder joints are evaluated according to methods described on pages 502 and 503.

Joint Passive Mediolateral Instability Mediolateral laxity or instability is tested by passive manipulation in various positions of flexion and extension, and the maximum medial or lateral joint angulation is measured in degrees. The severity of mediolateral joint instability is rated according to the excess number of angulation degrees compared to the opposite, “normal” side (Table 16-23). If both sides are involved, a comparison to accepted normal average values is made. The percentage of impair- ment is then multiplied by the relative value of the joint (Table 16-18) to determine the joint impair- ment. Carpal and shoulder instabilities are discussed on pages 502 and 503.

If the same joint presents other findings, the rules outlined on page 499 must be followed to avoid duplication of impairments.


* Multiply by the relative value of the joint (Table 16-18) to determine the joint impairment.

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation recorded for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.
*
Multiply by the relative value of the joint (Table 16-18) to determine the upper extremity impairment.

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-65
Physical Exam: Passive radial deviation of the MP joint of the thumb of 60°, compared to 30° on the normal side.
Analysis: The difference in angulation of 30° is graded as severe and represents a 60% joint impairment (Table 16-23). The MP joint repre- sents 15% of the thumb ray unit (Table 16-18).
Impairment Rating: The thumb impairment is 16% ? 15% = 9%; this is equivalent to 4% hand impairment (Table 16-1) and 4% upper extremity impairment (Table 16-2).


Wrist Elbow Joint Active Radial and Ulnar Deviations
Active radial or ulnar deviation of the wrist or elbow is measured in maximum active extension of the joint. The severity of lateral deviation is rated according to the excess number of angulation degrees compared to the normal opposite side (Table 16-24). The percentage of impairment is multiplied by the relative value of the joint (Table 16-18) to obtain the upper extremity impairment.

If the same joint presents other findings, the rules outlined on page 499 must be followed to avoid duplication of impairments.

---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-66


Exam: A displaced supracondylar fracture of the humerus healed in a 10° cubitus varus deformity. The elbow range of motion was normal. The opposite, normal elbow measured 15° cubitus val- gus. The radiograms showed good bone healing, with incomplete angular reduction.
Analysis: Excessive medial angulation on full active elbow extension is 10° (varus) + 15° (valgus angle lost) = 25°. A 25° excessive ulnar angulation rep- resents a “moderate,” or 20% joint impairment (Table 16-24). The elbow joint’s relative func- tional value is 70% of the upper extremity (Table 16-18).
Impairment Rating: Impairment of the upper extremity is 20% ? 70%, or 14%.


Carpal Instability
Carpal instability patterns are classified as mild, mod- erate, or severe. The classification is usually based on the roentgenographic findings listed in Table 16-25. A mild carpal instability exists also when a ligament tear has been diagnosed by arthrogram, arthroscopy, or MRI, even though the static roentgenographic find- ings may be normal. Certain individuals may have wrist pain and loss of strength related to a dynamic or nondissociative carpal instability that cannot be meas- ured by changes of angles on static roentgenograms. Symptoms of nondissociative wrist instability are painful clicking and clunking with activities of daily living. The radiocarpal joint represents 40% of the upper extremity (Table 16-18). Therefore, the grades of mild (20%), moderate (40%), and severe (60%) impairment represent upper extremity impairments of 8%, 16%, and 24%, respectively. Only one category of severity of carpal instability impairment is selected, based on the greatest severity of the


* Clenched fist neutral PA views.

† A positive angle (lunate extension) represents a DISI deformity A negative angle (lunate flexion) represents a VISI deformity

‡ See text for description.

Adapted from Lichtman DM, Alexander AH, eds. The Wrist and Its Disorders. 2nd ed.
Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders; 1997:chaps 7, 12, 35.			 Source: David M. Lichtman, Fort Worth, Texas.

roentgenographic findings. The severity categories cannot be added or combined. The selected upper extremity impairment value may be combined only with limited wrist motion. Pain and decreased strength are not rated separately.

The scapholunate and radiolunate angles are meas- ured on a lateral radiograph taken with the fist force- fully clenched (stressed view) and the wrist in neutral flexion/extension and lateral deviation. Lines are drawn on the film parallel to the long axis of the radius, through the long axis of the scaphoid (palmar surface), and a line representing the long axis of the lunate (a line perpendicular to the line connecting the two distal poles [Figure 16-51]). The angles between these lines are measured. The normal radiolunate relationship should be less than 10° of either volar or dorsal lunate angulation. The scapholunate angle ranges from 30° to 60° (average of 47°). The tri- quetrolunate stepoff is measured on the neutral pos- teroanterior (PA) view and represents proximal or ulnar translation of the triquetrum. The scapholunate gap is best profiled on a neutral PA view with the ulnar aspect of the hand elevated 10° to 15° or on a neutral anteroposterior (AP) view.

Ulnar translation may occur secondary to injury or arthritis. It is measured on the neutral PA view with the fist forcefully clenched. Normally, greater than 50% of the lunate overlies the ulnar border of the distal radius. As ulnar translation becomes more severe, progressively less of the lunate overlies the radius. The grades of severity of upper extremity impairment are classified as mild (8%), wherein less than 50% of the lunate overlies the distal radius ulnar


border; moderate (16%), wherein less than 25% of the lunate overlies the distal radius ulnar border; and severe (24%), wherein the lunate is displaced ulnarly off the radius (Table 16-25).

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-67


Exam: Roentgenographic evidence of a scapholu- nate angle of 65°, a radiolunate angle of 5°, and a scapholunate gap of 6 mm.
Analysis: The greatest impairment is “moderate” (16%) for the scapholunate gap (Table 16-25).
Impairment Rating: Impairment for carpal instabil- ity is 16% of the upper extremity.


Shoulder Instability
Shoulder instability, recurrent joint subluxation, or dislocation usually occurs when the integrity of either the glenoid labrum and/or of the surrounding capsuloligamentous and musculotendinous structures becomes compromised following either one or more acute traumatic dislocations, repetitive microtrauma, or arthritic conditions. Predisposing factors can include abnormal contour or alignment of the joint itself from either congenital or posttraumatic origins; congenital laxity of the capsuloligamentous struc- tures (eg, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome); or musculo- tendinous imbalances. Shoulder instability can be classified by direction (anterior, posterior, or infe- rior), etiology (traumatic or atraumatic), or volition (voluntary or involuntary).


Shoulder instability, recurrent subluxation, or dislo- cation must be adequately documented through a complete medical history, physical examination, and radiographic findings. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), arthroscopy, and examination under anesthe- sia may be useful components of the evaluation. An individual’s complaint of feeling or fearing that a joint is “popping” or “going out of place” without adequate clinical findings is not a basis for perma- nent impairment rating.

True shoulder instability must be differentiated from hyperlaxity. Laxity refers to the normal sliding of the humeral head in the glenoid socket. Instability is the inability to maintain a normal relationship between the head and the socket and can be manifested by pain and muscular defense induced by provocative movements in the direction of the instability. If a provocative test shows increased humeral head motion without reproducing the individual’s symp- toms, hyperlaxity instead of instability is considered to be present and no permanent impairment rating is assigned. The impingement-type shoulder pain must be differentiated from neck pain or radiating pain.
The “dead arm” syndrome caused by stretching of the brachial plexus can be transiently experienced by certain athletes (eg, pitchers during the act of throw- ing) due to humeral head subluxation, but in itself it is not diagnostic of shoulder instability.

The shoulder examination includes range-of-motion measurements and laxity and provocative tests. The tests can be difficult to interpret if the individual is not fully relaxed, as muscular contraction can tem- porarily stabilize a pathologically unstable shoulder. Since a certain amount of shoulder laxity is normal, it is critical for the examiner to determine whether the physical findings reproduce the individual’s symptoms. Comparison to the healthy side is also helpful.

The sulcus sign is elicited by applying downward traction on the humerus and tests the inferior transla- tion of the humeral head. A positive sign may merely be an indication of hyperlaxity and should not be given too much significance unless the maneuver clearly reproduces the individual’s discomfort or sense of instability.

The loading posterior/anterior drawer test is per- formed with the individual supine and the shoulder in neutral rotation, 60° abduction, and 30° flexion. One hand stabilizes the extremity in neutral rotation, and the other applies a posteriorly directed force to subluxate the shoulder posteriorly. The position of the examiner’s hands is reversed to reproduce the maneuver applying an anteriorly directed force. Note that in a clinical setting, the examiner can usually evaluate the severity of instability without inducing a shoulder dislocation.

The posterior/anterior glenohumeral translation has been classified as follows:
Trace: Small movement of the humeral head.
Class I: Humeral head rides up the glenoid but not over the rim.
Class II: Humeral head subluxes over the glenoid rim but reduces spontaneously in position when the axial load is withdrawn.
Class III: Humeral head frankly dislocates over the glenoid rim and remains dislocated with removal of force.

The apprehension and relocation tests are best car- ried out with the individual in a supine position. The anterior apprehension test is performed by applying external rotation as the shoulder is held in 90° abduc- tion. If the test is positive, the individual fears that the humeral head will slide out, causing pain.
Muscular defense against the motion is usually pres- ent. However, presence of pain alone is not necessar- ily diagnostic of instability. The anterior relocation test (Jobe’s) is performed by applying a posteriorly directed force to the proximal humerus while the shoulder is in 90° abduction and external rotation with the individual supine. This posterior stabilizing force should reduce the humeral head and relieve any apprehension of anterior instability.

Shoulder instability patterns are based on the param- eters listed in Table 16-26 and can be classified as occult instability, instability with a subluxating humeral head, and instability with a dislocating humeral head. The shoulder representing 60% of the upper extremity (Table 16-18), the patterns of occult (10%), subluxating (20%), and dislocating (40%) instabilities represent upper extremity impairments of 6%, 12%, and 24%, respectively. This value may be combined only with impairments due to decreased motion (Section 16.4). Pain and decreased muscle strength are not rated separately.


Analysis: According to Table 16-26, a class II humeral translation (subluxating head) with a his- tory of previous trauma, consistent relationship of symptoms with specific motions, reproducible symptoms on clinical testing, and positive radi- ographic findings corresponds to 12% upper extremity impairment.
The upper extremity impairment due to decreased shoulder motion is found in Section 16.4: IADD% = 0% and IABD% = 2% (Figure 16-43); IIR% = 0%
and IER% = 0% (Figure 16-46). The upper extrem- ity motion impairment is 2%.
Impairment Rating: The upper extremity impair- ments due to shoulder instability (12%) and decreased motion (2%) are combined (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) and equal 14% of the upper extremity, or 8% of the whole person (Table 16-3).


Compiled by EG McFarland, MD, Baltimore, Maryland.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-68

History: A 30-year-old athletic male sustained a third episode of anterior shoulder subluxation while delivering an overhead serve during a tennis match. He reported that he had sustained two pre- vious episodes of shoulder subluxation while playing tennis at ages 18 and 25.
Current Symptoms: One year later he reports decreased ability to abduct and externally rotate his shoulder due to pain and a feeling that it is going to “pop” out.
Exam: The shoulder active range of motion is 50° adduction, 130° abduction, 80° internal rotation, and 80° external rotation with normal flexion and extension. The tests for anterior instability, ante- rior apprehension, and anterior relocation (Jobe’s) all are positive. The axial load test showed that the humeral head could be subluxated anteriorly over the glenoid rim, but reduced spontaneously in place when the force-load was withdrawn (class II glenohumeral translation). This maneuver repro- duced the clinical symptoms. The shoulder radi- ogram was normal, but an MRI confirmed an anterior glenoid labrum tear. The man refuses sur- gery for personal reasons.

16.7b Arthroplasty
Resection arthroplasty of a joint may be carried out with or without implant replacement. Impairment ratings for the upper extremity following arthroplasty of specific joints are listed in Table 16-27 and reflect upgraded information.

In the presence of decreased motion, motion impair- ments are derived separately (Section 16.4) and com- bined with the arthroplasty impairment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604). If the same joint presents other findings, the rules outlined on page 499 must be fol- lowed to avoid duplication of impairments. However, impairment due to arthroplasty cannot be combined with impairments due to instability, subluxation, or dislocation.

After arthrodesis procedures, the impairment is based on the ankylosis impairment (IA%) for the cor- responding angle of fusion (V) according to the guidelines in Section 16.4.

A severe symptomatic failure of an implant arthro- plasty procedure (eg, symptomatic breakage or sub- luxation of the device) is given 100% of the joint value as listed in Table 16-18.

Impairments involving the resection of malignant tumors with reconstructive surgery including arthro- plasty should receive individual consideration.


* Multiply by the relative hand value of the digit (Table 16-18) to determine the hand impairment.

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.


CMC: thumb carpometacarpal; IP: thumb interphalangeal; MP: metacarpophalangeal; PIP: proximal interphalangeal; DIP: distal interphalangeal.

Modified from Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Principles and methods of impairment evaluation in the hand and upper extremity. In: Engelberg AE, ed. Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment. Third ed. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1989:47; prepared with the assistance of DM Lichtman, Fort Worth, Texas, and EG McFarland, Baltimore, Maryland.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-69
Exam: An individual with a total wrist (radiocarpal and distal radioulnar joints) replacement has 30° flexion and 20° extension, 0° radial deviation, and 30° ulnar deviation.
Analysis: Wrist implant arthroplasty = 24% impair- ment of the upper extremity (Table 16-27). The impairments of the upper extremity due to restricted motion are found in Figures 16-28 and 16-31:
IF% = 5%; IE% = 7%
IRD% = 4%; IUD% = 0%
5% + 7% + 4% = 16%
Impairment Rating: 24% combined with 16% = 36% upper extremity impairment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

16.7c Musculotendinous Impairments
Intrinsic Tightness
Intrinsic tightness in the hand may be demonstrated by a test described by Bunnell. Hyperextension of the metacarpophalangeal (MP) joint in a normal hand still allows passive flexion of the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint. If the intrinsic muscles are tight or contracted, the available stretch of these muscles is taken up by the hyperextended position of the MP joint, and passive flexion of the PIP joint will be difficult. The digit impairment due to intrinsic tightness is rated according to Table 16-28 and multi- plied by the relative hand value of the digit (Table
16-18) to derive the hand impairment value.

The impairment due to intrinsic tightness can be combined with other impairments of the same digit, providing they do not share the same pathomechan- ics, eg, in extensor tendon subluxation over the MP joint (Table 16-30). Intrinsic tightness impairment cannot be combined with that due to decreased motion at the MP or PIP joints.


Constrictive Tenosynovitis
The impairment percent due to constrictive tenosyn- ovitis (Table 16-29) is multiplied by the relative hand value of the digit (Table 16-18) to derive its hand impairment. This impairment may be combined with other impairments of the digit (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) but not with decreased motion.


* Multiply by the relative hand value of the digit (Table 16-18) to determine the hand impairment.

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.


* Multiply by the relative hand value of the digit (Table 16-18) to determine the hand impairment.

Modified from Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.


Extensor Tendon Subluxation at the MP Joint of the Fingers
The digit impairment due to extensor tendon subluxa- tion at the metacarpophalangeal (MP) joint (Table 16- 30) is multiplied by the relative hand value of the digit (Table 16-18) to obtain its hand impairment value. It cannot be combined with impairment due to restricted motion at the MP joint or to other related manifesta- tions of the same pathomechanical disturbance.


16.7 d Tendinitis
Several syndromes involving the upper extremity are variously attributed to tendinitis, fasciitis, or epi- condylitis. The most common of these are the stub- born conditions of the origins of the flexor and extensor muscles of the forearm where they attach to the medial and lateral epicondyles of the humerus. Although these conditions may be persistent for some time, they are not given a permanent impair- ment rating unless there is some other factor that must be considered.

If an individual has had tendon rupture or has under- gone surgical release of the flexor or extensor origins or medial or lateral epicondylitis, or has had excision of the epicondyle, there may be some permanent weakness of grip as a result of the tendon rupture or the surgery. In this case, impairment can be given on the basis of weakness of grip strength according to Section 16.8b. Although there is no good data on the time required to regain maximum strength after sur- gery, the data on strength loss after carpal tunnel release suggests that impairment rating according to Section 16.8b should not be determined less than 1 year after surgery.


16.8 Strength
	Evaluation
Because strength measurements are functional tests influenced by subjective factors that are difficult to control and the Guides for the most part is based on anatomic impairment, the Guides does not assign a large role to such measurements. Those who have contributed to the Guides believe that further research is needed before loss of grip and pinch strength is given a larger role in impairment evaluation.

Strength measures the power with which musculo- tendinous units act across a bone-joint lever-arm sys- tem to actively generate motion, or passively resist movement against gravity and variable resistance.
The effectiveness and magnitude of muscle contrac- tion depends on the integrity of the dynamic and pas- sive elements of a complex lever system, including its muscles and tendons, normal passive motion in the joints across which the muscles act, and the qual- ity of innervation of the muscles. Many subjective or nonmeasurable factors, including fatigue, handed- ness, time of day, age, nutritional state, pain, and the individual’s cooperation, further influence strength measurements. Voluntary muscle strength testing remains somewhat subjective until a precise way of measuring muscle contraction is generally available. It should also be noted that the correlation of strength with performance of activities of daily living is poor and that increased strength does not necessar- ily equate with increased function.


16.8 a Principles
In a rare case, if the examiner believes the individ- ual’s loss of strength represents an impairing factor that has not been considered adequately by other methods in the Guides, the loss of strength may be rated separately. An example of this situation would be loss of strength due to a severe muscle tear that healed leaving a palpable muscle defect. If the exam- iner judges that loss of strength should be rated separately in an extremity that presents other impair- ments, the impairment due to loss of strength could be combined with the other impairments, only if based on unrelated etiologic or pathomechanical causes. Otherwise, the impairment ratings based on objective anatomic findings take precedence.
Decreased strength cannot be rated in the presence of decreased motion, painful conditions, deformities, or absence of parts (eg, thumb amputation) that pre- vent effective application of maximal force in the region being evaluated.

Motor weakness associated with disorders of the peripheral nerve system and various degenerative neuromuscular conditions are evaluated according to guidelines described in Section 16.5 and the Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System. It should be understood that weakness or loss of strength can occur without muscle atrophy.

When evaluating strength, the examiner must have good reason to believe the individual has reached maximal medical improvement and that the condition is a “permanent” one as defined in Chapter 1 and the Glossary. Maximum strength is usually not regained for at least a year after an injury or surgical procedure. Because impairment is evaluated when the individual has reached MMI, strength can only be applied as a measure when a year or more has passed since the time of injury or surgery. This determination is best made with measurements taken over a period of time. Two methods are used to determine loss of strength in the upper extremity. Measurements of grip and pinch strength are used to evaluate power weaknesses relat- ing to the structures in the hand, wrist, or forearm.
Manual muscle testing of major groups is used for testing strength about the elbow and shoulder.

16.8b Grip and Pinch Strength
Tests repeated at intervals during an examination are considered to be reliable if there is less than 20% variation in the readings. If there is more than 20% variation in the readings, one may assume the indi- vidual is not exerting full effort. The test is usually repeated three times with each hand at different times during the examination, and the values are recorded and later compared.

Grip strength measurements must be performed in a standard manner because altering wrist, forearm, and/or elbow position will change the results. The generally accepted position for measurements is for the individual to be seated with back against the chair and feet flat on the floor. The arm should be relaxed beside the lateral torso, the elbow flexed at 90°, and the forearm and wrist in neutral position. Grip strength measurements may be taken with a Jamar dynamometer. The second (4 cm) or third
(6 cm) position, according to the size of the hand, usually allows the individual to apply maximal force comfortably.

Two techniques have been reported to help detect individuals who exert less than maximal effort on grip strength testing. Stokes pointed out that the plot- ting of grip strength measurements from each of the five handle settings of the Jamar dynamometer would produce a bell-shaped curve. Those individu- als not exerting maximal effort will produce results yielding a straight line or a flat curve.

An alternate method is the rapid exchange grip tech- nique. The grip strength first is determined by stan- dard techniques. The individual then is instructed to grip the dynamometer with maximal effort, first with one hand, then quickly with the other hand, for at least five exchanges. Individuals who did not exert maximal effort with the standard technique will record significantly higher strength readings. If they become aware of this, the strength of both hands will drop dramatically.

Pinch strength measurements are done with a pinch gauge and may include chuck or three-digit pinch, key or lateral pinch, and tip pinch with separate dig- its. Key pinch measurements usually are sufficient. Measurements are repeated three times. The three readings each for grip and pinch strength are aver- aged and compared to those of the opposite extrem- ity, which usually is normal. If both extremities are involved, the strength measurements are compared to the average normal strengths listed in Tables 16-31 through 16-33.


Adapted with permission from Swanson AB, Matev IB, de Groot Swanson. The strength of the hand. Bull Prosthet Res. Fall 1970:145-153.

Adapted with permission from Swanson, AB, Matev IB, de Groot Swanson. The strength of the hand. Bull Prosthet Res. Fall 1970:145-153.


Adapted with permission from Swanson AB, Matev IB, de Groot Swanson. The strength of the hand. Bull Prosthet Res. Fall 1970:145-153.


If there is evidence that the individual is exerting less than maximal effort, the grip strength measurements are invalid for estimating impairment. It is acknowl- edged that wide variations exist in strength, even among persons doing the same kind of work. Little evidence exists of a significant difference in grip strength between the dominant and nondominant hand. If the evaluator believes that a significant dif- ference in grip strength was lost in the dominant hand and that it impacts the ability to perform activi- ties of daily living, this should be addressed in the evaluation report (see Section 16.1b).

An index of loss of strength uses the following formula:

Normal strength – Limited strength = Strength loss Normal strength	index %

Impairments of the upper extremity due to loss of pinch and grip strength are based on the values of the strength loss index shown in Table 16-34.

Rate the function that measures the greatest loss of strength. Both measurements are not applied.


16.8c Manual Muscle Testing
Manual muscle testing assesses an individual’s abil- ity to move a joint through a full range of motion against gravity, or move it against additional resist- ance applied by the examiner, and/or hold the joint position against resistance. Manual muscle testing is subject to the individual’s conscious or unconscious control. Individuals whose performance is inhibited by pain or fear of pain may not be good candidates for this testing. Results of strength testing should be reproducible on different occasions or by two or more trained observers.


* Use clinical judgment to select the appropriate percentage from the range of values shown for each severity grade.

† Complete range of motion against gravity only without resistance.

‡ Complete range of motion against gravity with some resistance.

Derived from Section 16.4 and Table 16-11 by G. de Groot Swanson, Grand Rapids, Michigan.


Upper extremity impairment ratings for strength deficits about the elbow and shoulder (Table 16-35) were derived by multiplying the maximum relative value of each unit of motion by the percentage of severity of strength deficit found on manual muscle testing. The relative functional value of each unit of motion is the same as in Section 16.4, Evaluating Abnormal Motion. The severity of strength deficits is classified and rated on the same principles used for evaluation of the peripheral nerves (Table 16-11).
The numeric grades are sometimes also named 5, normal; 4, good; 3, fair; 2, poor; 1, trace; and 0, no muscle contraction. In the absence of peripheral nerve involvement, most weaknesses usually fall in the grade 4 category: “complete active range of motion against gravity with some resistance.” Few injuries result in a more profound weakness, such as a grade 3 category: “complete active range of motion against gravity only, without resistance.” Muscle strength graded 3 or lower is usually accompanied by other clinical findings such as atrophy. Because the functional units of motion of each joint were assigned on a 100% scale, the upper extremity impairment values derived for weakness of each unit of motion are added directly together.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-70


History: Healed Bennett’s fracture.
Physical Exam: Individual complained of pain and weakness when he applied and removed strong alligator clamps. Full active range of motion of the thumb ray. Positive “grind” test at the car- pometacarpal (CMC) joint. Lateral (key) pinch was 6 kg on the injured side and 10 kg on the nor- mal side.
Clinical Studies: Radiographs: irregularities of the CMC joint surfaces with arthritic changes.
Analysis: 10% – 6% = 40% strength loss index % 10%
This corresponds to a 20% joint impairment (Table 16-34). The maximum impairment value of the CMC joint is 22% of the upper extremity (Table 16-18).
Impairment Rating: 20% ? 22% = 4% impairment of the upper extremity due to symptomatic post- traumatic arthritis at the CMC joint.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-71


History: A worker sustained an open injury to the lateral side of the elbow with proximal damage to the extensor carpi radialis longus and brevis, and pronator teres, and loss of a portion of the lateral epicondyle of the humerus.
Physical Exam: Normal neurologic examination. Full active range of elbow extension and supina- tion against gravity with full resistance. Full active range of flexion and pronation against grav- ity with some resistance: grade 4 (Table 16-35).
Analysis: Flexion weakness: 5% impairment of the upper extremity. Pronation weakness: 4% impair- ment of the upper extremity.
Impairment Rating: 5% + 4% = 9% impairment of the upper extremity due to strength deficit about the elbow.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-72
History: An individual “pulled” his shoulder while sorting some lumber. A full-thickness tear of the rotator cuff was diagnosed on MRI. He failed to respond to conservative management and under- went open surgical repair.
Current Symptoms: Currently works with restric- tions due to shoulder weakness, easy fatiguability, and some pain with overhead movement.
Clinical Studies: After optimal healing time and therapy, the MRI showed a healed rotator cuff with some scarring.
Physical Exam: Full active range of shoulder rota- tion, extension, and adduction. Full active range of shoulder flexion and abduction against gravity with some resistance: grade 4 (Table 16-35).
Analysis: Flexion weakness: 6% upper extremity impairment. Abduction weakness: 3% upper extremity impairment.
Impairment Rating: 6% + 3% = 9% impairment of the upper extremity due to weakness about the shoulder.


16.9 Summary of Steps for Evaluating Impairments of the
	Upper Extremity
I. Determine the upper extremity impairment derived for the hand region.
Determine and record each of the following on the Upper Extremity Evaluation Record, Part 1 (Figure 16-1).

Hand Region
1. Individual digit impairment due to amputation
(Sections 16.2c and 16.2d).
Note: Thumb amputations proximal to the MP joint are rated in terms of upper extremity impairment (Table 16-4 and page 440) and added to the upper extremity impairment value obtained from step 8 below.
2.
Individual digit impairment due to sensory
loss from digital nerve lesions (Section 16.3;
Figures 16-6 and 16-7; and Tables 16-6
and 16-7).
Note: Impairment related to neuromas of digi- tal nerves is discussed in Section 16.3c.
3. Individual joint impairment due to abnormal motion (Section 16.4: thumb IP, p. 454;
MP, p. 456; CMC, p. 458; finger DIP, p. 462; PIP, p. 462; MP, p. 464).
Note: The motion impairments at the DIP, PIP, and MP joints of the fingers are combined
(p. 465 and Combined Values Chart, p. 604) to determine the digit impairment. The thumb motion impairments at the IP, MP, and CMC joints are added (p. 460).
4. Individual digit impairments due to other dis- orders (Section 16.7).
5. Total individual digit impairment: combine impairments due to amputation (step 1), sen- sory loss (step 2), abnormal motion (step 3), and other disorders (step 4)(Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
6. Convert individual digit impairments to hand impairments (Table 16-1).
7. Total hand impairment: add the hand impair- ment values contributed by each digit.
8. Convert the total hand impairment to impair- ment of the upper extremity (Table 16-2).
9. If applicable, add the upper extremity impair- ment due to thumb amputation proximal to the MP joint (Table 16-4) to the upper extremity impairment derived from the hand region (step 8).
10. If applicable, determine the upper extremity impairment due to loss of strength and combine with the upper extremity impairment derived from the hand region (step 8).
11. If no other upper extremity impairment exists, convert the upper extremity impairment related to the hand region to an impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3).
12. If other impairments of the upper extremity are present, enter the upper extremity impairment value due to the Hand Region on Line II of Part 2 of the Evaluation Record.


II. Determine the upper extremity impairment derived from the Wrist, Elbow, and Shoulder Regions and enter on the appropriate space or line of Upper Extremity Evaluation Record, Part 2 (Figure 16-1).

1. Wrist Region
Determine upper extremity impairments due to loss of motion (Section 16.4g) and other disor- ders (Section 16.7), and combine the values to determine the upper extremity impairment related to the wrist region. Enter on line II.
2. Elbow Region
Determine upper extremity impairments due to loss of motion (Section 16.4h) and other disor- ders (Section 16.7), and combine the values to determine the upper extremity impairment related to the elbow region. Enter on line II.
3. Shoulder Region
Determine upper extremity impairments due to loss of motion (Section 16.4i) and other disor- ders (Section 16.7), and combine the values to determine the upper extremity impairment involving the shoulder region. Enter on line II.

III. Determine the upper extremity impairment due to amputation through the arm or forearm (Section 16.2b) and enter on line I of the Evaluation Record, Part 2.

IV. Determine the upper extremity impairment due to peripheral nerve disorders (Section 16.5) and enter on line III of the Evaluation Record, Part 2.

V. Determine the upper extremity impairment due to peripheral vascular disorders (Section 16.6) and enter on line IV of the Evaluation Record, Part 2.

VI. Determine the upper extremity impairments due to other disorders not included in regional impairment (Section 16.7) and enter on line V of the Evaluation Record, Part 2.
VII.
Determine the total upper extremity impair- ment and enter on the bottom of Part 2 of the Record.
Combine the upper extremity impairments due to amputation (other than hand) (Line I of Part 2), regional disorders (hand, wrist, elbow, shoulder) (Line II of Part 2), peripheral vascular disorders (Line III of Part 2), peripheral nerve disorders (Line IV of Part 2), and other disorders not included in regional impairment (Line V of Part 2) (Combined Values Chart, p. 604).

VIII. Convert the upper extremity impairment to a whole person impairment (Table 16-3).

IX. When both upper extremities are involved, derive the whole person impairment percent for each and then combine both values using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).


16.10  Clincal Examples
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-73


History: Table saw injury. Maximum medical reha- bilitation reached.
Findings: Index finger: Amputation at DIP joint with painful neuroma on radial side that prevents use of the digit for most activities. Thumb: Amputation through CMC joint.
Analysis:
Index finger:
DIP joint amputation = 45% digit impairment (Table 16-5), or 9% hand impairment (Table 16-1) and 8% upper extremity impairment (Table 16-2).
Radial nerve neuroma: Grade 1 pain or sensory deficit = 95% deficit (Table 16-10a); maximum impairment of the upper extremity for deficit of radial palmar digital nerve of index finger = 5% (Table 16-15). 95% ? 5% = 5% (rounded) impair- ment of the upper extremity.
8% (amputation) combined with 5% (neuroma) equals 13% impairment of the upper extremity due to the index finger (See Section 16.4f and Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
Thumb:
Amputation at the CMC joint = 38% impairment of the upper extremity (Table 16-4).


Impairment Rating: 13% (index) + 38% (thumb) = 51% impairment of the upper extremity, or 31% impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3). See the rating method for thumb amputation proximal to the MP joint.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-74

History: A 36-year-old man who sustained a crush injury of the left hand is now at maximum med- ical improvement.
Physical Exam: Decreased motion of all digits. Ring finger amputation through the PIP joint. Impaired sensibility on both sides of ring finger stump and little finger.
Analysis: Rate decreased motion of thumb (Figures 16-12 and 16-15, and Tables 16-8a, 16-8b, and 16-9) and fingers (Figures 16-21, 16-23, and
16-25).
Rate sensory loss of digits (Figures 16-6 and 16-7, and Tables 16-6 and 16-7).
Impairment Rating: Specific findings and impair- ments ratings are given in Figure 16-52.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-75

History: A 35-year-old man sustained a deep lacera- tion of the right middle finger, volar aspect, at the level of the PIP joint without joint involvement, but with complete laceration of the flexor digito- rum profundus (FDP) and flexor digitorum super- ficialis (FDS) tendons, and of the radial digital nerve. A primary flexor tenorrhaphy of the FDP and FDS tendons and a microneurorrhaphy of
the radial digital nerve were done, followed by a 3-month hand rehabilitation program.
Current Symptoms: Numbness on radial side of the middle finger, pain on flexion, and weakness of the right hand.

Findings and Analysis:
Sensory impairment:
9 mm of two-point discrimination on the radial side of the distal and middle phalanges of the middle finger.
Partial longitudinal sensory loss on radial side of middle finger over an 80% length (Figure 16-7) corresponds to a 12% impairment of the finger (Table 16-7).
Motion impairment:
              IE% + IF% = finger impairment %. DIP: 0° to 50°  0% + 10% = 10% (Figure 16-21).
PIP: –0° to 60° 7% + 24% = 31% (Figure 16-23).
MP: +20° to 90° 0% +  0% =  0% (Figure 16-25).
10% combined with 31% = 38% finger impair- ment (see Section 16.4f).
Impairment Rating: The total finger impairment is obtained by combining the sensory impairment (12%) with the motion impairment (38%) by means of the Combined Values Chart (see Section 16.4f). This equals 45% finger impairment, or 9% hand impairment (Table 16-1), 8% upper extrem- ity impairment (Table 16-2), and 5% impairment of the whole person (Table 16-3). Additional esti- mates are not given for pain and loss of strength.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-76


History: A 45-year-old firefighter sustained a severe thermal burn to the left hand. Multiple skin graft- ing procedures and joint releases were performed.
Physical Exam: Decreased motion of digits and wrist (See Figure 16-53a and 16-53b). Static two- point discrimination measured between 7 and
12 mm in all digits.
Analysis: Decreased motion of thumb (Figures 16-12 and 16-15, and Tables 16-8a, 16-8b, and 16-9), fingers (Figures 16-21, 16-23, and 16-25), wrist (Figures 16-28 and 16-31), and elbow (Figure
16-37). Partial transverse sensory loss of digits (Figures 16-6 and 16-7; Tables 16-6 and 16-7).
Impairment Rating: A completed Upper Extremity Impairment Evaluation Record (Figures 16-53a and 16-53b) summarizes the clinical findings and impairment ratings.


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-77
History: A 28-year-old operator had multiple ampu- tations of the right hand from a punch press injury.
Physical Exam: Stumps with good skin coverage.
No evidence of neuroma formation.
Impairment Rating: The examination results and impairment calculations are shown in the Upper Extremity Impairment Evaluation Record (Figure 16-54).


---END EXAMPLE---
---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-78
History: A 45-year-old woman fell in a parking lot and sustained a Colles’ fracture of the right distal radius.
Physical Exam: Full range of motion at the finger joints, some limitation of wrist motion, some deformity of the wrist, moderate pain with heavy activity, and 40% grip strength loss index.
Impairment Rating: The factors to be rated are the loss of motion of the wrist and forearm rotation. Strength loss should not be rated because it shares the same pathomechanics as decreased motion (See Section 16.8). No impairment estimate for deformity or pain is given. Based on the anatomic examination, the impairment evaluation is deter- mined as follows.
Wrist motion impairment:
% Upper Extremity
Wrist Motion	Degrees	Impairment
Extension	30°	IE% = 5%
(Figure 16-28)
Flexion	40°	IF% = 3%
Radial deviation	20°	IRD% = 0%
(Figure 16-31)
Ulnar deviation	10°	IUD% = 4%
Add the upper extremity impairments contributed by the wrist units of motion: 5% + 3% + 4% = 12% impairment of the upper extremity.

Elbow motion impairment:
Forearm rotation is discussed in Section 16.4h (Figure 16-36).
% Upper Extremity
Elbow Motion	Degrees	Impairment
Pronation	40°	IP % = 3%
Supination	30°	IS % = 2%
Add the upper extremity impairments contributed by the elbow units of motion: 3% + 2% + 5% impairment.
Impairment Rating: Combine the upper extremity regional impairments: 12% (wrist) and 5% (elbow) = 16% impairment of the upper extremity (Combined Values Chart, p. 604), or 10% impair- ment of the whole person (Table 16-3).


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 16-79


Findings: An individual sustained multiple injuries of the upper extremity and had the following regional impairments: 50% of the thumb, 10% of the index finger, 5% of the upper extremity due to the wrist, and 2% of the upper extremity due to the elbow.
Analysis: Hand region:
50% thumb impairment corresponds to 20% hand impairment (Table 16-1). 10% index finger impairment corresponds to 2% hand impairment. 20% + 2% = 22% impairment of the hand, or 20% impairment of the upper extremity (Table 16-2).
Wrist region:
5% upper extremity impairment.
Elbow region:
2% upper extremity impairment.
Impairment Rating: The regional impairments of the upper extremity are combined: 20% combined with 5% is 24%; 24% combined with 2% is 26% impairment of the upper extremity, or 16% whole person impairment (Table 16-3).


515


• Combined Values Chart (p. 604).	*Use Table 16-1 (digits to hand).	†Use Table 16-2 (hand to upper extremity).	§Use Table 16-3. Courtesy of G. de Groot Swanson, MD, Grand Rapids, Michigan.


516


• Combined Values Chart (p. 604).	*Use Table 16-1 (digits to hand).	†Use Table 16-2 (hand to upper extremity).	§Use Table 16-3. Courtesy of G. de Groot Swanson, MD, Grand Rapids, Michigan.


517


• Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
If both limbs are involved, calculate the whole person impairment for each on a separate chart and combine the percents (Combined Values Chart).


518


• Combined Values Chart (p. 604).	*Use Table 16-1 (digits to hand).	†Use Table 16-2 (hand to upper extremity).	§Use Table 16-3. Courtesy of G. de Groot Swanson, MD, Grand Rapids, Michigan.


Bibliography
Amadio PC. The Mayo Clinic and carpal tunnel syndrome.
Mayo Clin Proc. 1992;67:42.
American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. Joint Motion: Method of Measuring and Recording. Chicago, Ill: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons; 1965.
American Board of Electrodiagnostic Medicine; American Association of Electrodiagnostic Medicine; 21 Second St SW, Rochester, MN 55902.
American Society of Hand Therapists. Clinical Assessment Recommendations. 2nd ed. Chicago, Ill: American Society of Hand Therapists; 1992.
American Society for Surgery of the Hand. The Hand: Examination and Diagnosis. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 1983.
Aulicino PL. Clinical examination of the hand. In: Hunter J, Mackin E, Callahan AD, eds. Rehabilitation of the Hand.
5th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: CV Mosby Co; 1995:53-75.
Bechtol CO. Grip test, the use of a dynamometer with adjustable handle spacings. J Bone Joint Surg Am.
1954;36:820-824.
Bell JA. Sensibility evaluation. In: Hunter J, Schneider L, Mackin E, eds. Rehabilitation of the Hand. Philadelphia, Pa: CV Mosby Co; 1978:278-279.
Bell-Krotoski J, Tomanick E. The repeatability of testing with Semmes-Weinstein monofilaments. J Hand Surg Am. 1987;12:155-161.
Bell-Krotoski JA. Sensibility testing: current concepts. In: Hunter J, Mackin E, Callahan AD, eds. Rehabilitation of the Hand. 5th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: CV Mosby Co; 1995:109- 128.
Boyes JH, ed. Bunnell’s Surgery of the Hand. 5th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: JB Lippincott Co; 1970.
Brand PW, Hollister A. Clinical Mechanics of the Hand. 3rd ed. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1999.
Braun RM, Davidson K, Doehr S. Provocative testing in the diagnosis of dynamic carpal tunnel syndrome. J Hand Surg Am. 1989;14:195-197.
Braun RM, Doehr S, Leonard N. Quantitative management of hand function: application to medical decision-making and return to the work place after cumulative nerve trauma. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, Van Beek AL, eds. Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1998:543-549.
Brigham CR. The Guides Casebook: Cases to Accompany Guides to Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fourth Edition. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1999.


Callahan AD. Sensibility assessment: prerequisites and tech- niques for nerve lesions in continuity and nerve lacerations. In: Hunter J, Mackin E, Callahan AD, eds. Rehabilitation of the Hand. 5th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: CV Mosby Co; 1995:129-152.
Cambridge-Kelling CA. Range-of-motion measurement of the hand. In: Hunter J, Mackin E, Callahan AD, eds.
Rehabilitation of the Hand. 5th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: CV Mosby Co; 1995:93-107.
Cohen MS. Instability of the wrist. In: Brigham CR, Talmage JB, eds. The Guides Newsletter. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; March-April 1998:1-3.
Culver J. Personal written and oral communication. The Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, 1990-1992.
Dellon AL, Kallman CH. Evaluation of functional sensation in the hand. J Hand Surg Am. 1983;8:865-870.
Demeter SL, Andersson GBJ, Smith GM, eds. Disability Evaluation. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1996.
De Palma A. Surgery of the Shoulder. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: JB Lippincott Co; 1973.
Fess E. Documentation: essential elements of an upper extremity assessment battery. In: Hunter J, Mackin E, Callahan AD, eds. Rehabilitation of the Hand. 5th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: CV Mosby Co; 1995:185-214.
Fess E. The need for reliability and validity in hand assess- ment instruments. J Hand Surg Am. 1986;11:621-623.
Green DP. Carpal dislocations and instabilities. In: Green DP. Operative Hand Surgery. 3rd ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 1993:861-928.
Hawkins RJ, Bokor DJ. Clinical evaluation of shoulder problems. In: Rockwood CA, Matsen III FA, eds. The Shoulder. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1990:149-177.
Katz J. Symptoms, functional status, and neuromuscular impairment following carpal tunnel release. J Hand Surg Am. 1995;20:549-555.
Kline DG. Caution in the evaluation of results of peripheral nerve surgery. In Samiit M, ed. Peripheral Nerve Lesions. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag; 1990.
Kline DG, Hudson AR. Operative Results for Major Nerve Injuries, Entrapments, and Tumors. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1995:89.
Kendall H, Kendall F, et al. Muscle Testing and Function.
4th ed. Baltimore, Md: Williams & Wilkins; 1993.
Lankford LL. Reflex sympathetic dystrophy. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, eds. Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1980:chap 12.


Lichtman DM. Introduction to the carpal instabilities. In: Lichtman DM, Alexander AH, eds. The Wrist and Its Disorders. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1988:181-188.
Linscheid RL, Dobyns JH, Bebout JW. Traumatic instability of the wrist: diagnosis, classification, and pathomechanics. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1972;54:1612-1632.
Louis DS. The carpal tunnel syndrome in the work place. In: Millender LH, Louis DS, Simmons BP, eds. Occupational Disorders of the Upper Extremity. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 1992:145-153.
Luck JV Jr, Florence DW. A brief history and comparative analysis of disability systems and impairment rating guides. Orthop Clin North Am. 1988;19:839-844.
Lundborg G, Dahlin L. Pathophysiology of peripheral nerve trauma. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, Van Beek AL, eds.
Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1998:353-363.
Mann FA, Gilula LA. Post-traumatic wrist pain and instabil- ity: a radiographic approach to diagnosis. In: Lichtman DM, Alexander AH, eds. The Wrist and Its Disorders. 2nd ed.
Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1988:91-108.
McBride ED. Disability Evaluation. 6th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: JB Lippincott Co; 1963.
McFarland EG, Torpey B, Curl LA. Evaluation of shoulder laxity. Sports Med. 1996;22:264-272.
McFarland EG, Campbell G, McDowell J. Posterior shoul- der laxity in asymptomatic athletes. Sports Med.
1996;24:468-471.
Medical Research Council. Aids to the Examination of the Peripheral Nervous System. London, England: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office; 1976. Memorandum No. 45.
Moberg E. Objective methods for determining the functional value of sensibility in the hand. J Bone Joint Surg Br.
1958;40:454-476.
Moberg E. Sensibility in reconstructive limb surgery. In: Fredericks S, Brody GS, eds. Symposium on the Neurologic Aspects of Plastic Surgery. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1978:30-35.
Moberg E. Two-point discrimination test. Scand J Rehabil Med. 1990;22:127-134.
Ochoa JL. Nerve fiber pathology in acute and chronic com- pression. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, Van Beek AL, eds.
Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1998:475-483.
Omer GE Jr. Sensation and sensibility in the upper extrem- ity. Clin Orthop. 1974;104:30-36.
Omer GE Jr. Methods of assessment of injury and recovery of peripheral nerves. Surg Clin North Am. 1981;61:303-319.

Omer GE Jr. Report of the committee for evaluation of the clinical result in peripheral nerve injury. J Hand Surg Am. 1983;8(part 2):754-758.
Omer GE Jr. Nerve compression syndromes. Hand Clin.
1992;8:317-324.
Omer GE Jr, Bell-Krotoski J. Sensibility testing. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, Van Beek AL, eds. Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1998:11-28.
Omer GE Jr, Bell-Krotoski J. The evaluation of clinical results following peripheral nerve suture. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, Van Beek AL, eds. Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1998:340-349.
Phalen GS. The carpal tunnel syndrome. Seventeen years experience in diagnosis and treatment of six-hundred forty- four hands. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1966;48:211.
Pirela-Cruz MA. Surgical exposures of the peripheral nerves in the extremities. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, Van Beek AL, eds. Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1998:175-209.
Prendergast Lauckhardt KH. Decision pathways for the ther- apist’s management of peripheral nerve injury. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, Van Beek AL, eds. Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1998:94-104.
Rayan GM, Asal NR, Bohr PC. Epidemiology and economic impact of compression neuropathy. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, Van Beek AL, eds. Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1998:484-493.
Richards LG. Posture effects on grip strength. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1997;78:1154-1156.
Russell RC, Hussmann J, Burns M. Clinical motor function testing—upper extremity. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, Van Beek AL, eds. Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems. 2nd Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1998:39-55.
Seddon HJ. Surgical Disorders of the Peripheral Nerves. 2nd ed. Edinburgh, Scotland: Churchill Livingstone; 1975:32-56.
Slocum DB, Pratt DR. Disability evaluation for the hand.
J Bone Joint Surg. 1946;28:491-450.
Spinner M, Spinner RJ. Management of nerve compression lesions of the upper extremity. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, Van Beek AL, eds. Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1998:501-533.
Stokes HM. The seriously injured hand: weakness of grip.
J Occup Med. 1983;25:683-684.
Swanson AB. Evaluation of impairment of function in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:925-940.


Swanson AB, Mays JD, Yamauchi Y. A rheumatoid arthritis evaluation record for the upper extremity. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:1003-1013.
Swanson AB, Matev IB, de Groot Swanson G. The strength of the hand. Bull Prosthet Res. Fall 1970:145-153.
Swanson AB. Evaluation of disabilities and recordkeeping. In: Swanson AB. Flexible Implant Resection Arthroplasty in the Hand and Extremities. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1973:chap 5.
Swanson AB, Hagert CG, de Groot Swanson G. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. J Hand Surg Am.
1983;8(part 2):709-722.
Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Implant arthroplasty in the carpal and radiocarpal joints. In: Lichtman DM, Alexander AH, eds. The Wrist and Its Disorders. 2nd ed. Philiadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1988:616-641.
Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G, Blair SJ. Evaluation of impairment of hand and upper extremity function. In: Barr JS Jr, ed. Instructional Course Lectures, American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgery. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1989;38(part B):77-102.
Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Principles and methods of impairment evaluation in the hand and upper extremity. In: Doege TC, Houston TP, eds. Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment. Fourth ed. Chicago, Ill: American Medical Association; 1993:13-74.
Swanson AB. Pathomechanics of deformities in hand and wrist. In: Hunter J, Mackin E, Callahan AD, eds.
Rehabilitation of the Hand. 5th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: CV Mosby Co; 1995:1315-1328.

Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G, Hagert CG. Evaluation of impairment of hand function. In: Hunter J, Mackin E, Callahan AD, eds. Rehabilitation of the Hand. 5th ed.
Philadelphia, Pa: CV Mosby Co; 1995:1839-1896.
Swanson AB, de Groot Swanson G. Impairment evaluation of the peripheral nerve system of the upper extremity. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, Van Beek AL, eds. Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1998:767-779.
Szabo R, Gelberman R, Dimick M. Sensibility testing in patients with carpal tunnel syndrome. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1984;66:61-64.
Tubiana R, Valentin P. Opposition of the thumb. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48:967-977.
Tubiana R, Thomine JM, Mackin E. Examination of the Hand and Upper Limb. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1984.
Van’t Hof A, Heiple KG. Flexor-tendon injuries of the fin- gers and thumb: a comparative study: a report on sixty pri- mary tendon repairs by the authors, to which reports of other series have been added to furnish statistics on 310 cases. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1958;40:256-262.
Wilbourn AJ, Shields RW Jr. Generalized polyneuropathies and other nonsurgical peripheral nervous system disorders. In: Omer GE Jr, Spinner M, Van Beek AL, eds. Management of Peripheral Nerve Problems. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa: WB Saunders Co; 1998:648-660.




================================================================================
Chapter 17: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Lower Extremities
17.1 Principles of Assessment
17.2 Methods of Assessment
17.3 Lower Extremity Impairment Evaluation Procedure Summary and Examples
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating perma- nent impairment of the lower extremities, including impairment ratings that reflect an individual’s ability to perform the activities of daily living (ADL). For evaluation purposes, the lower extremities are divided into six sections: the feet, the hindfeet, the ankles, the legs, the knees, the hips, and the pelvis. In addition to the skeletal framework, assessment of the lower extremities also requires an assessment of its joints and the associated soft tissues, vascular sys- tem, and nervous system. The lower extremities are evaluated on the basis of anatomic changes, diagnos- tic categories, and functional changes. Impairment evaluations pertain to conditions that have reached maximum medical improvement (MMI), as defined in Chapter 1 and the Glossary.

The following revisions have been made for the fifth edition: (1) The principles of assessment have been expanded to clarify when the different evaluation methods should be used; (2) a new table, Guide to the Appropriate Combination of Evaluation Methods (Table 17-2), has been added to indicate which methods are appropriate to use in combination;


523


(3) the evaluation of causalgia and complex regional pain syndrome now follows the same principles used to evaluate central nervous system lesions;
(4) additional case examples are provided; and (5) a lower extremity worksheet is provided as a template to simplify making the assessment and recording the evaluation.


17.1 Principles of
	Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for per- forming and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

The evaluation should include a comprehensive, accurate medical history; a review of all pertinent records; a comprehensive description of the individ- ual’s current symptoms and their relationship to daily activities; a careful and thorough physical examina- tion; and all findings of relevant laboratory, radiologic (imaging), and ancillary tests. It is also essential that the rater include in the report a description of how the impairment was calculated. Because many ratings are reviewed by other physicians and third-party adminis- trators, the explanation of the calculation will lead to a better understanding of the method used and the report will be considered more reliable.


17.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs
History
The case history should be based mainly on the indi- vidual’s own statements rather than on secondhand information. The evaluator should consider informa- tion from other sources, including medical records. The physician should use this information cautiously, especially if it is subjective. It is not appropriate to question the individual’s integrity. If information from the individual is inconsistent with what is known about the medical condition, the circumstances, or the written record, this should be reported and comment should be included about the inconsistencies.

The medical history must describe the chief com- plaint. Discuss the quality, frequency, duration, and anatomic location of pain, numbness, paresthesias, and weakness in detail. Further, report how the con- dition interferes with daily activities. The physician should elicit the facts about when and how the condi- tion started and the relationship to any related prob- lems elsewhere in the lower extremity or in other areas of the musculoskeletal system, such as the spine. The report should describe any precipitating events or factors.

Ideally, include the individual’s description as to how the symptoms developed and the assumed cause. In addition, discuss the results of special studies and treatment. The physician should review available x- rays and other imaging studies personally or report the findings as being those of another reviewer (based on reports). A review of organ systems and of the general medical history can provide potentially helpful information, including complicating medical problems that can affect the diagnosis and care plan.


Examination
Physical examination of nonmusculoskeletal areas (eg, the nervous system) is discussed in other parts of the Guides. A targeted neurologic assessment is needed for individuals with lower extremity prob- lems. Guided by the history and physical examina- tion, the physician records lower extremity–related physical findings, such as range of motion, limb length discrepancy, deformity, reflexes, muscle strength and atrophy, ligamentous laxity, motor and sensory deficits, and specific diagnoses such as fractures and bursitis.

Neurologic examination of the lower extremities includes measurement of knee and ankle reflexes and motor and sensory functions. It is important to ensure that lower extremity impairment discussed in this chapter is not due to underlying spine pathology. If lower extremity impairment is due to an underly- ing spine disorder, the lower extremity impairment would, in most cases, be accounted for in the spine impairment rating.

The Lower Extremities	525


17.1 b Description of Clinical Studies
Specific Lower Extremity Techniques
The physician needs to review and record findings from diagnostic studies, including laboratory tests, electromyographic, vascular, and roentgenographic studies, CT scans, and MRI studies with or without contrast. A summary of the studies should be included as a separate paragraph or section. While imaging and other studies may assist physicians in making a diagnosis and help determine the method for assessment, they are not the sole determinants.


17.2 Methods of
	Assessment
Thirteen methods can be used to assess the lower extremities, as listed in Table 17-2. Table 17-1 classi- fies the 13 methods into three non–mutually exclu- sive categories to reflect their primary mode of assessment: (1) anatomic, (2) functional, or (3) diag- nosis based. Detailed discussions of each method are provided in the sections noted.


Anatomic changes, including range of motion (ROM), any limb length discrepancy, arthritis, skin changes, amputation, muscle atrophy, nerve impair- ment, and vascular derangement are assessed in the physical examination and supported with clinical studies. Arthritis has its own diagnostic category, which applies to individuals with documented arthri- tis who are impaired by pain, weakness, or stiffness, but who have maintained functional ranges of motion. Arthritis is evaluated based on narrowing of the joint space as measured from x-rays. Causalgia and com- plex regional pain syndrome (reflex sympathetic dys- trophy) are evaluated using a combination of ROM and peripheral neurologic evaluation techniques.

Diagnosis-based estimates are used to evaluate impairments caused by specific fractures and defor- mities, as well as ligamentous instability, bursitis, and various surgical procedures, including joint replacements and meniscectomies. In certain situa- tions, diagnosis-based estimates are combined with other methods of assessment.

Functional impairments are chosen for conditions when anatomic changes are difficult to categorize or when functional implications have been documented. Functional impairments are assessed last.

The evaluator should read this chapter in its entirety and understand and follow the evaluation methods using the worksheet given in Figure 17-10 at the end of the chapter or a similar, comprehensive checklist. The evaluator’s first step is to establish the diagno- sis(es) and whether or not the individual has reached MMI. The next step is to identify each part of the lower extremity that might possibly warrant an impairment rating (pelvis, hip, thigh, etc, down to the toes). Figure 17-10 lists potential methods for each lower extremity part. The evaluator determines whether ROM impairment or other regional impair- ments are present for each relevant part and records the impairment values in the appropriate locations on the worksheet. The selection of the most specific method(s) and the appropriate combination are
later considerations.

526	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


After all potentially impairing conditions have been identified and the correct ratings recorded, the evalua- tor should select the clinically most appropriate (ie, most specific) method(s) and record the estimated impairment for each. The cross-usage chart (Table 17-2) indicates which methods and resulting impair- ment ratings may be combined. It is the responsibility

of the evaluating physician to explain in writing why a particular method(s) to assign the impairment rating was chosen. When uncertain about which method to choose, the evaluator should calculate the impairment using different alternatives and choose the method or combination of methods that gives the most clinically accurate impairment rating.


X = Do not use these methods together for evaluating a single impairment. 0 = See specific instructions for CRPS of the lower extremity.

The Lower Extremities	527


Typically, one method will adequately characterize the impairment and its impact on the ability to per- form ADL. In some cases, however, more than one method needs to be used to accurately assess all fea- tures of the impairment. When more than one rating method is used, the individual impairment ratings are combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

Avoid combining methods that rate the same condi- tion. Selecting the optimal approach or combining several methods requires judgment and experience. A careful examination and review of supporting mate- rial is essential to produce accurate and consistent results. If more than one method can be used, the method that provides the higher rating should be adopted.


17.2 a Converting From Lower Extremity to Whole Person Impairment
To make this chapter easier to use, the tables in this chapter show the impairment percentages of the whole person, the lower extremity, and the specific lower extremity part together. The whole person impairments are not in parentheses; the lower limb impairment percents are in parentheses ( ); and, when applicable, the specific part impairments are in brack- ets [ ]. To calculate the lower extremity impairment percent from a specific part impairment percent (eg, foot), multiply by 0.7. To calculate whole person impairment from a lower extremity impairment, mul- tiply by 0.4. These values are shown in Table 17-3.


528	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


Some individuals may have several impairments involving different parts of the same lower extremity; others may have several impairments of the same lower extremity part. If there are several impairments involving different regions of the lower extremity (eg, the thigh and the foot), evaluate each impair- ment separately, convert these regional impairments to whole person impairments, and combine the whole person impairment rating using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604). If there are multiple impair- ments within a region (eg, the toes and the ankle), combine these regional, lower extremity impairments of the foot and convert the combined foot impair- ment to a whole person impairment. Similarly, when using separate methods on the same region, combine the regional impairments before converting to a whole person impairment rating.

The 13 assessment methods listed in Table 17-1 are discussed separately below.


17.2 b Limb Length Discrepancy
To determine limb length discrepancy, place the indi- vidual supine on the examination table with the legs in the same position, measure the distance between the anterior superior iliac spine and the medial malleolus on the involved side, and compare it with the opposite side. To identify where on the leg the discrepancy is, the knee is flexed to 90° while the feet are kept flat on the table. If one knee is higher than the other, the tibia is longer on that leg. Another method sometimes used is to evaluate the level of the iliac crest when the individual is standing. This is not recommended because differences in iliac crest lev- els may be due to pelvic obliquity, flexion, or adduc- tion deformity of the hip. When these reasons exist for the obliquity, it is referred to as apparent leg length discrepancy.

Both clinical methods have at least a 0.5- to 1.0-cm variance, and both measurements are difficult to per- form in a person with pelvic angulation, knee flexion contracture, or significant ankle edema. For this rea- son, teleroentgenography is recommended. If sur- face measurements with a tape measure from the anterior superior iliac spine to medial malleolus are used, they should be repeated three times and aver- aged to reduce measurement error. Impairments from limb length discrepancy depend on the magnitude of the leg length difference and are provided in Table 17-4. When applicable, the leg length discrepancy impairment is combined with other impairments.


In case of shortening due to overriding or malalign- ment or fracture deformities, but not to include flex- ion or extension deformities, combine the following values with other functional sequelae, using the Combined Values Chart:

  0-1.25 cm (0-1/2 in) = 5% of lower extremity 1.25-2.5 cm (1/2-1 in) = 10% of lower extremity 2.5-3.75 cm (1-11/2 in) = 15% of lower extremity 3.75-5.0 cm (11/2-2 in) = 20% of lower extremity

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-1
2% Impairment Due to Limb Length Discrepancy


Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: A 108-kg (240-lb), 172.5-cm (5 ft 8 in), unbelted passenger sustained an open, commin- uted fracture of the right femur in an automobile accident. He was treated with an unlocked nail. The fracture healed with shortening.
Current Symptoms: Walks with a decided limp. No pain or weakness.
Physical Exam: Full, pain-free range of motion of the hip and knee. No apparent atrophy of the thigh or calf; no loss of strength. The left leg measures 94 cm (37 in) from the iliac crest to the tip of the medial malleolus. The right leg measures 96.5 cm (38 in).
Clinical Studies: Teleroentgenography: left leg measures 81.5 cm (32.1 in), and the right leg measures 83.5 cm (33 in).
Diagnosis: Healed femur fracture with shortening.
Impairment Rating: 2% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Although the individual has a limp (gait abnormality), gait derangement should be used only when no other method is available to rate the person. Limb length discrepancy is a more specific method. According to Table 17-4, the 2 cm of
---END EXAMPLE---
The Lower Extremities	529


shortening results in an impairment of 5% of the leg, or 2% impairment of the whole person.
Because the teleroentgenography is more accurate than tape measurements, especially in an obese individual (as this person was), it is the preferred method of determining leg length. Limb shortening may be combined with other methods (eg, diagno- sis of femur fracture, as listed in Table 17-2).


17.2c Gait Derangement
Gait derangement is present with many different types of lower extremity impairments and is always secondary to another condition. An impairment rat- ing due to a gait derangement should be supported by pathologic findings, such as x-rays. Except as oth- erwise noted, the percentages given in Table 17-5 are for full-time gait derangements of persons who are dependent on assistive devices.


Whenever possible, the evaluator should use a more specific method. When the gait method is used, a written rationale should be included in the report.
The lower limb impairment percents shown in Table 17-5 stand alone and are not combined with any other impairment evaluation method.

Section 17.2c does not apply to abnormalities based only on subjective factors, such as pain or sudden giving-way, as with, for example, an individual with low-back discomfort who chooses to use a cane to assist in walking.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-2
20% Impairment Due to Gait Derangement From Hip Pain


Subject: 61-year-old woman.
History: Fell on snow-covered steps and landed on her right knee. Developed severe pain in the right groin and later in the hip. No previous problems with her hip. She was last year’s club tennis champion in the over-60 age bracket.
Current Symptoms: Difficulty walking for more than 5 blocks; continued pain; needs a cane when walking outside her home; can no longer play ten- nis or run.
Physical Exam: Walks with a Trendelenburg gait; full range of motion of the hip and knee.
Complains of pain with full internal rotation of the hip. Neurovascular status intact.
Clinical Studies: Original x-rays: normal. Bone scan and MRI: did not reveal specific abnormalities.
Follow-up x-rays 12 months later: slight narrowing of the hip joint space, which is measured at 3 mm, compared to 4 mm on the left.
Diagnosis: Hip pain with difficulty walking.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Mild narrowing of the hip joint space on x-ray and pain at the extreme of internal rotation indicate early osteoarthritis is a possibility. The narrowing would result in an impairment of 3% of the whole person according to Table 17-3.
However, the gait derangement results in a higher rating according to Table 17-5, and the higher rat- ing should be used when it seems to more accu- rately represent the clinical situation. The two methods should not be combined because a gait evaluation is never combined with any other method. A rationale for its use should be provided by the evaluator.
---END EXAMPLE---
530	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


17.2d Muscle Atrophy (Unilateral)
In evaluating muscle atrophy, the leg circumference should be measured and compared to the opposite leg at equal distances from either the joint line or another palpable anatomic structure. For example, a thigh atrophy may involve measuring the thigh cir- cumference with a tape measure 10 cm above the patella and comparing it to a similar measure on the other leg. Calf circumference is compared at the maximum level bilaterally. Neither limb should have swelling or varicosities that would invalidate the measurements. Diminished muscle function can be estimated using four different methods. Only one should be used; that is, use only one method for assessing muscle function. Atrophy ratings should not be combined with any of the other three possible ratings of diminished muscle function (gait derange- ment, muscle weakness, and peripheral nerve injury). When muscle dysfunction is present, assess the con- dition with all four methods. Use the method that most accurately and objectively reflects the individ- ual’s impairment. Atrophy at both the thigh and calf is evaluated separately and the whole person impair- ment combined. Impairment ratings from atrophy
are provided in Table 17-6.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-3
1% Impairment Due to Unilateral Muscle Atrophy From a Fracture

Subject: 78-year-old woman.
History: Sustained a closed fracture of her left tibia in a fall at the grocery store. The fracture was undisplaced and treated with a short leg cast for 3 months.
Current Symptoms: Healed fracture; no pain; leg weakness despite extensive physical therapy.
Limited walking.
Physical Exam: Normal gait without support. No malalignment of the leg; neurovascular status is intact. The left calf measures 1.3 cm less than the right at the lower extremity’s greatest circumfer- ence. The thigh circumferences 10 cm above the patella are within 1 cm. No discernible weakness by manual muscle testing.
Clinical Studies: X-rays of the tibia: complete heal- ing of the fracture in good alignment.
Diagnosis: Healed tibia fracture.
Impairment Rating: 1% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Fractures can lead to atrophy of an extremity when the limb immobilization is pro- tracted. Especially in older people, it is difficult to regain full girth, despite adequate physical ther- apy. If no other abnormalities are present, these individuals can be rated by measuring the amount of atrophy. Other measures of muscle function, such as muscle strength or gait derangement, should not be combined with this method.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-4
4% Impairment Due to Unilateral Leg Muscle Atrophy From a Fracture

Subject: 49-year-old man.
History: Fractured the right tibia in a fall while mountain climbing. Completed rehabilitation and is at MMI 12 months later.
Current Symptoms: Pain-free walking with a mild limp. Symptoms of fatigue when walking or run- ning. Minimal impact on ADL.
Physical Exam: 2 cm of thigh muscle atrophy and 1 cm of calf muscle atrophy. Manual muscle testing shows normal strength.

The Lower Extremities	531


Clinical Studies: X-rays: undisplaced, healed tibial fracture.
Diagnosis: Healed tibia fracture.
Impairment Rating: 4% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The healing times of fractured tibias are highly variable. Some individuals require pro- longed immobilization and inactivity, which may result in significant atrophy. Younger individuals are more likely to be able to rebuild leg muscle mass and function compared with older individu- als. Although manual muscle tests were normal, the injured extremity may fatigue more rapidly than usual. Evaluating the impairment in terms of atrophy gives an impairment estimate that more closely matches the person’s capabilities when results of manual muscle testing are normal but atrophy exists. Combine 8% lower extremity thigh impairment (3% whole person impairment) and 3% lower extremity calf impairment (1% whole person impairment) (Table 17-6) to give an esti- mated 4% whole person impairment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
---END EXAMPLE---

17.2e Manual Muscle Testing
Manual muscle testing, which typically involves groups of muscles, depends on the examinee’s coop- eration and is subject to his or her conscious and unconscious control. To be valid, the results should be concordant with other observable pathologic signs and medical evidence. In general, this method is best used for pathology that does not have a primary neu- rologic basis, eg, a compartment syndrome or direct muscle trauma. Weakness caused by an identifiable motor deficit of a specific peripheral nerve should be assessed according to Section 17.2l, Peripheral Nerve Injuries.


Measurements can be made by one or two observers. If the measurements are made by one examiner, they should be consistent on different occasions. If made by two, they should be consistent between examiners. Even in a fully cooperative individual, strength may vary from one examination to another, but not by more than one grade. If they vary by more than one grade between observers, or by the same examiner on separate occasions, the measurement should be con- sidered invalid. In those individuals, impairment esti- mates should not be made using this section.
Individuals whose performance is inhibited by pain or the fear of pain are not good candidates for manual muscle testing, and other evaluation methods should be considered for them. Table 17-7 shows the criteria on which estimates and grades of the lower extrem- ity’s strength are based, and Table 17-8 lists the actual ratings based on lower extremity weakness.


532	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


* Hip adduction weakness is evaluated as an obturator nerve impairment (see Table 17-37).


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-5
10% Impairment Due to Muscle Weakness From a Patella Fracture

Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Sustained a displaced fracture of the patella with multiple deep abrasions. The fracture required open reduction and internal fixation, but because of the deep, dirty abrasions and superfi- cial infection, the surgery had to be delayed for 5 weeks, during which time he ambulated on crutches. Postoperatively, he was placed in a long leg cast for 6 weeks, followed by physical therapy for 8 weeks with a home exercise program.
Current Symptoms: Occasional discomfort about the knee, inability to walk fast or run, pain after long periods of sitting with the knee flexed, and a general weakness of the leg.
Physical Exam: Healed abrasions; surgical scar. Full range of motion of the knee and no instability. A
1-cm atrophy of the thigh. Manual muscle testing demonstrates weakness of both the quadriceps and the hamstring muscles; both are grade 4. Can flex and extend the knee against some resistance.

Clinical Studies: X-rays: healed patella fracture; no joint space narrowing.
Diagnosis: Residual muscle weakness and surgical scar following a patella fracture.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Manual muscle testing is difficult to per- form, but sometimes it is the best method avail- able. Gait is less specific; the atrophy is minor and does not fully reflect the amount of weakness.
There is no peripheral nerve injury. Use Table 17- 7 to determine the grade of the muscle deficit, in this case grade 4. Referring to Table 17-8, exten- sion of the knee with muscular function of grade 4 results in a lower extremity impairment of 12% (5% whole person impairment). Similarly, flexion of the knee at grade 4 results in a lower extremity impairment of 12% (5% whole person impair- ment). Converting to whole person and combining the two impairments results in a total whole per- son impairment of 10%.
---END EXAMPLE---
The Lower Extremities	533


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-6
12% Impairment Due to Muscle Weakness From a Tibia Fracture With Compartment Syndrome

Subject: 30-year-old man.
History: Fell, sustaining a tibia fracture. Postopera- tively, developed an anterior compartment syndrome, which was treated surgically.
Current Symptoms: Walks with an ankle-foot orthosis (AFO). When walking without this, he limps and walks with a drop foot. No pain.
Physical Exam: Ankle extension strength is grade 3; thus, he requires an AFO. Also has grade 3 weak- ness of the extensor hallucis longus. There is calf atrophy of 2 cm, consistent with the weakness observed on manual muscle testing.
Clinical Studies: Radiograph: healed tibia fracture.
Diagnosis: Tibia fracture with compartment syn- drome.
Impairment Rating: 12% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The 10% whole person impairment due to ankle weakness (25% lower extremity impair- ment) (Table 17-8) is combined with 3% whole person impairment (7% lower extremity impair- ment) for the loss of great toe extension using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604), giving 12% whole person impairment. A muscle strength deficit should not be combined with any other measure of muscle function, such as atrophy.
---END EXAMPLE---

17.2f Range of Motion
Lower extremity impairment can be evaluated by assessing the range of motion of its joints, recogniz- ing that pain and motivation may affect the measure- ments. If it is clear to the evaluator that a restricted range of motion has an organic basis, three measure- ments should be obtained and the greatest range measured should be used. If multiple evaluations exist, and there is inconsistency of a rating class between the findings of two observers, or in the find- ings on separate occasions by the same observer, the results are considered invalid. Figures 17-1 to 17-6 illustrate one method of measuring range of motion in the lower extremity. The ranges listed in Tables
17-9 through 17-14 are examples of mild, moderate, and severe impairments and are to be used as guides. Range-of-motion restrictions in multiple directions do increase the impairment. Add range-of-motion impairments for a single joint to determine the total joint range-of-motion impairments. For example, hip motion is evaluated and any impairment added in each of the six principal directions of motion.

534	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


Figure 17-1 Using a Goniometer to Measure Flexion of the Right Hip*


(a) Goniometer is placed at the right hip, and the pelvis is locked in the neutral position by flexing the left hip until the lumbar spine is flat.
(b) Examinee flexes the right hip until the anterior superior iliac spine begins to move, when the angle is recorded.
(c) To measure loss of extension of the right hip, the left hip is flexed until the lumbar spine is flat on the examining table, as determined by the examiner’s hand, which is placed between the lumbar spine and table surface. The right thigh should rest flat on the table;
any right hip flexion is recorded as a flexion contracture.


a.	b.

c.

* Accurate measurements of the lower extremity can also be obtained using a proper inclinometer (see Appendix).


a.	b.	c.


The Lower Extremities	535


Figure 17-3 Measuring Internal and External Hip Rotation*

The examinee is prone on a flat surface, and the knee is flexed 90°. One part of the goniometer is parallel to the flat surface, and the other is along the tibia. While testing, the examiner should place the hand on the knee to determine whether there is significant laxity of the knee joint. Keep the pelvis flat on the table.
Neutral


Figure 17-5 Measuring Foot Dorsiflexion and Plantar Flexion

The goniometer’s pivot is centered over the ankle, and one arm par- allels the tibia. The examiner reads the angles subtending the maxi- mum arcs of motion for dorsiflexion and plantar flexion. The test is repeated with the knee flexed to 45°. The averages of the maximum angles represent dorsiflexion and plantar flexion ranges of motion.


* Adapted from American Orthopaedic Association. Manual of Orthopedic Surgery.
Rosemont, Ill: American Orthopaedic Association; 1966.


Figure 17-4 Measuring Knee Flexion

(a) The examinee is supine and the goniometer is next to the knee joint; one goniometer arm is parallel to the lower leg, and the other is parallel to the femur. Any deviation from 0° is recorded.
(b) The examinee exerts maximum effort to flex the knee. The flexion angle is obtained from the goniometer.


a.


b.


536	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


Figure 17-6 Evaluating the Range of Motion of a Toe: the Metatarsophalangeal (MTP) Joint of the Great Toe


(a) The examinee is seated in the position for evaluation of the toes. The knee is flexed to 45°, and the foot and MTP joint are in the neutral position.
(b) Extension: The goniometer is under the MTP joint, and its angle is read as a baseline. The examinee extends (dorsiflexes) the toe maximally, and the angle subtending the maximum arc of motion is read; the baseline angle is subtracted.
(c) Flexion: The goniometer is placed over the MTP joint. The baseline angle is read. The examinee plantar flexes the MTP joint maximally. The angle subtending the maximum arc of motion is read, and the baseline angle is subtracted.


a.


b.	c.


The Lower Extremities	537
Range-of-motion impairment values for the lower extremity are listed in Tables 17-9 to 17-14.


* An abduction contracture of greater than 20° = 15% whole person impairment.


* 	The maximum whole person impairment percent for impairment of two or more lesser toes of one foot is 2%.

538	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-7
8% Impairment Due to Decreased Range of Motion From a Tibia Fracture

Subject: 45-year-old woman.
History: Sustained a tibia fracture in a motor vehicle accident.
Current Symptoms: No pain; stiffness about the ankle and foot, with some swelling of the foot and ankle toward evening. Cannot stand for long peri- ods and cannot use shoes with elevated heels.
Physical Exam: Ankle flexion is 6°; ankle extension is 5°. Toe extension is less than 10° for all toes. 1- cm atrophy of the left calf. It is difficult to deter- mine the strength of the ankle and toe extensors, but a mild weakness is noted.
Clinical Studies: X-rays: healed tibia fracture with no malalignment.
Diagnosis: Healed tibia frature.
Impairment Rating: 11% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Moderate (6%) loss of ankle flexion (Table 17-11); mild (3%) loss of ankle extension; severe (2%) loss of toe motion (Table 17-14).
Ankle flexion and extension losses are added (6% + 3% = 9%). Combine these with loss of toe motion by means of the Combined Values Chart (p. 604). The whole person impairment is 11%. The range-of-motion (ROM) method is preferable to the atrophy or muscle testing meth- ods. Comparing impairment values from Tables 17-11 and 17-14 (ROM) with those from Table 17-6 (atrophy), the impairment from a ROM assessment is greater than one for atrophy and more accurately characterizes the individual’s impairment. Manual muscle testing is difficult to perform when close to normal because of the lower leg muscles’ limited excursion about the
ankle and toes when motion is severely restricted.
---END EXAMPLE---

17.2g Joint Ankylosis
An immobile joint is an impairment even when the position of ankylosis is optimal. Malposition in angulation or rotation of an arthrodesed or fused joint increases the magnitude of the impairment.
Surgical correction usually is preferable to accepting a significant malposition, but it is not always possi- ble or practical. Impairment estimates for malposi- tion are therefore included for the infrequently encountered individual who is not a candidate for surgical correction.

The following text and Tables 17-15 through 17-30 indicate the optimal neutral positions for ankyloses of the lower extremity joints and provide the impairment percents for ankyloses in those optimal positions.
Any variation from the optimal neutral position of an ankylosed joint increases the baseline impairment percent as indicated in the tables. The values listed are for the maximum end of the deformity range.
Specific deformities should be rated using interpola- tion of the ranges in the tables as illustrated by exam- ples in this section. Multiple malposition deformities of the same joint, ie, angulation and malrotation, are added, whereas deformities of different joints are combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604). The baseline rating for ankylosis in the neutral posi- tion is used only once for each joint. As noted else- where, added or combined impairment ratings can never exceed 100% of the lower extremity.


Hip
The optimal position of ankylosis is 25° to 40° flex- ion and neutral rotation, adduction, and abduction. This position represents a 20% whole person impair- ment and a 50% lower extremity impairment.

Tables 17-15 through 17-19 provide impairment esti- mates for hip ankyloses in various positions. See Figures 17-1 through 17-3 for illustration of the measurement of hip motion and ankylosis.
Impairment estimates for rotation, abduction, and adduction deformities are added. The maximum hip impairment or lower limb impairment is 100%, which is a 40% whole person impairment.


* The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.

The Lower Extremities	539


* The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.


* The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.


* The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.


* The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-8
40% Impairment Due to Hip Ankylosis After a Fracture Dislocation of the Hip

Subject: 64-year-old man.
History: Sustained an injury to the right hip in an industrial accident involving a fall from a moving forklift. Landed on the right hip with a central fracture dislocation of the hip joint. An open reduction was performed with less than satisfac- tory reduction. In the postoperative period, sus- tained a myocardial infarction, preempting further surgery. The fractures healed, but the hip was ankylosed. With rehabilitation completed, he is at MMI 16 months after injury.
Current Symptoms: No pain in the hip, but diffi- culty walking, particularly up and down stairs. Can sit comfortably, but has difficulty getting up from a chair and getting in and out of a car.
Physical Exam: Walks with the aid of one crutch. No motion in the right hip, which is ankylosed in 55° of flexion, 12° of external rotation, and 10° of abduction. Neurovascular status is intact.
Clinical Studies: Radiograph: healed right hip fracture-dislocation fused in flexion; external rotation and abduction deformity.
Diagnosis: Fracture dislocation of right hip with malunion.
Impairment Rating: 40% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The impairment rating for a hip that is ankylosed in the optimal position is 50% of the lower extremity. Add additional impairment per- centages when the position is less than optimal. In this case, the flexion position of 55° results in 25% additional lower extremity impairment, external rotation of 12° results in another 12% lower extremity impairment, and abduction of 10° results in a 25% lower extremity impairment.
Adding 50% + 25% + 12% + 25% = 112%. Since
no impairment can be greater than that for an amputation, the impairment of the lower extrem- ity is 100%, which is equivalent to a 40% whole person impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---
540	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


Knee
The optimal position is 10° to 15° of flexion with neu- tral alignment. Figure 17-4 shows how the goniometer is used to measure knee flexion. Ankylosis in the opti- mal position is a 67% lower extremity impairment or 27% whole person impairment.


Impairments beyond those of the optimal position are evaluated according to Tables 17-20 through 17-23. Malpositions of the knee include varus, val-
gus, and malrotation deformities, which can increase the impairment up to 100% impairment of the lower extremity.


* 	The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.


* The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.

* The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.


* The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-9
32% Impairment Due to Ankylosis of the Knee


Subject: 41-year-old man.
History: Sustained a comminuted open distal right femur and proximal tibia fracture in a car acci- dent; became infected and healed with ankylosis.
Current Symptoms: No pain. Has difficulty walk- ing, sitting, and driving. Some swelling of the lower leg by the end of the day.
Physical Exam: Several well-healed scars about the knee. There is ankylosis in 20° of flexion with
7° valgus and normal rotation compared to the left leg.
Clinical Studies: X-rays: well-healed tibia and femur fractures.
Diagnosis: Tibia and femur fractures with ankylosis of the knee joint.
Impairment Rating: 32% impairment of the whole person.

The Lower Extremities	541
Comment: Ankylosis in the optimal position results in a 27% whole person impairment (67% lower extremity impairment). This man has a 20° flex- ion deformity, rather than a 10° to 15° position, which would be optimal. Adding 5% whole per- son impairment from Table 17-22 to the 27% yields a total whole person impairment rating
of 32%.
---END EXAMPLE---

Ankle
The optimal ankylosis position is the neutral position without flexion, extension, varus, or valgus. Ankylosis of the ankle in the neutral position is a 4% whole per- son impairment, a 10% lower extremity impairment, and a 14% foot impairment. A variation from the neu- tral position should be evaluated according to Tables 17-24 through 17-28. The maximum impairments are 25% whole person impairment, 62% lower extremity impairment, and 88% ankle impairment. Figure 17-5 illustrates a measurement of dorsiflexion and plantar flexion.


* The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.


* 	The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.


* 	The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.


* 	The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.


* The appropriate ankylosis impairment percent is added to the impairment percent for ankylosis in the neutral position given in the text.

542	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-10
11% Impairment Due to Ankle Fracture

Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Sustained a severe distal tibial and intra- articular ankle fracture in a fall from a height. The fracture was treated with external fixation and healed with bony ankylosis of the ankle. History of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
Current Symptoms: No pain; walks slowly; diffi- culty walking on uneven surfaces.
Physical Exam: The ankle is ankylosed in 15° dorsi- flexion and 7° varus.
Clinical Studies: X-rays: healed distal tibial and intra-articular ankle fracture. Fusion across the ankle joint.
Diagnosis: Ankle fracture with ankylosis.
Impairment Rating: 20% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: 11% whole person impairment related to ankle flexion (Table 17-24) and 10% whole person impairment related to the varus deformity (Table 17-25). These ankle impairments are combined, giving a 20% whole person impairment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604). Because of the diabetic con- dition and marginal circulation to the ankle region, corrective surgery is not recommended. The impairment method for malpositioning and ankylo- sis is more appropriate than using the method for an intra-articular ankle fracture (see Table 17-33). An impairment percent related to diabetes, if appropriate, should be combined with the lower extremity impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

Foot (Hindfoot, Midfoot, Forefoot)
For the subtalar part of the foot, the optimal ankylo- sis position is neutral, or 0°, without varus or valgus. The ankylosis impairment in the neutral position is 4% for the whole person, 10% for the lower extrem- ity, and 14% for the foot. Malpositioning may increase the whole person impairment up to 25%.
Varus or valgus malpositioning is estimated in the same way as for the ankle (Tables 17-25 and 17-26).

Ankylosis impairment for loss of the tibia–os calcis angle is estimated according to Table 17-29. The tibia–os calcis angle is made by the longitudinal axis of the os calcis and the longitudinal axis of the tibia with the ankle in neutral position (Figure 17-7).


* The tibia–os calcis angle is shown in Figure 17-7.

* The tibia–os calcis angle is the angle between the longitudinal axis of the os calcis and the vertical tibia, as shown by this drawing based on a lateral x-ray of the foot and ankle in the neutral position.


For pantalar ankylosis, the optimal position is neu- tral; the impairment estimates for that position are 10% for the whole person, 25% for the lower extremity, and 35% for the foot. Further flexion, varus, and valgus impairments are estimated as shown in Tables 17-25 to 17-29.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-11
14% Impairment Due to Ankle Ankylosis and Calcaneus Fracture

Subject: 41-year-old woman.
History: Fractured her ankle and calcaneal tuberos- ity in a fall from a height. Treated with a cast and healed with a bony fusion.

The Lower Extremities	543


Current Symptoms: Walks without support but with special shoes. Difficulty walking on uneven ground and has swelling when she sits for long periods of time.
Physical Exam: Considerable swelling about the heel with widening; no tenderness; no motion at the ankle.
Clinical Studies: X-rays: fused ankle with fractured calcaneus and a 5° flexion angle at ankle joint.
The tibia–os calcis angle is 100°.
Diagnosis: Ankle ankylosis with a healed fracture of the distal tibia and calcaneus.
Impairment Rating: 14% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The optimal ankle position is neutral; 5° of flexion is a small deformity and does not add to the impairment. The ankle rating for ankylosis is 4% whole person impairment. The normal
tibia–os calcis angle is >120°; 100° indicates an additional 10% whole person impairment. Both impairments are added, resulting in a 14% whole person impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

Toes
Figure 17-6 illustrates the use of a goniometer to measure a toe’s range of motion. Table 17-30 pro- vides impairment estimates related to ankylosis of one or several toes.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-12
3% Impairment Due to Crush Injury of the Toes
Subject: 52-year-old man.
History: A metal object weighing over 68 kg (150 lb) fell on his toes at work. He sustained a crush injury to the right forefoot involving the soft tis- sues as well as multiple fractures to the toes.
Treatment was nonoperative, and the soft tissue and fractures healed.
Current Symptoms: Difficulty walking fast or long distances; inability to run; stiffness of all toes.
Physical Exam: The forefoot is mildly swollen and has several healed scars. Range of motion of the metatarsophalangeal joint of the great toe is 15° of extension and 15° of flexion. There is no motion of the other toe joints. The toes are in a normal position of function. Walks with a mild limp; unable to push off normally.
Clinical Studies: X-rays: healed toe fractures.


Diagnosis: Crush injury to the forefoot with multiple fractures.
Impairment Rating: 3% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Mild loss of motion of the great toe cor- responds to a 1% whole person impairment (Table 17-14). Add this to the 2% whole person impair- ment due to ankylosis of toes 2 through 5 in a functional position (Table 17-30).
---END EXAMPLE---
544	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


17.2h Arthritis
Roentgenographic grading systems for inflammatory and degenerative arthritis are well established and widely used for treatment decisions and scientific investigation. For most individuals, roentgenographic grading is a more objective and valid method for assigning impairment estimates than physical find- ings, such as the range of motion or joint crepitation. While there are some individuals with arthritis for whom loss of motion is the principal impairment, most people are impaired more by pain and some- times weakness, but they still can maintain func- tional ranges of motion, at least in the early stages of the process. Range-of-motion techniques are there- fore of limited value for estimating impairment sec- ondary to arthritis in many individuals. Crepitation is an inconstant finding that depends on such factors as forces on joint surfaces and synovial fluid viscosity.


Certain roentgenographic findings that are of diag- nostic importance, such as osteophytes and reactive sclerosis, have no direct bearing on impairment. The best roentgenographic indicator of disease stage and impairment for a person with arthritis is the cartilage interval or joint space. The hallmark of all types of arthritis is thinning of the articular cartilage; this cor- relates well with disease progression.

The need for joint replacement or major recon- struction usually corresponds with complete loss of the articular surface (joint space). The impairment estimates in a person with arthritis (Table 17-31) are based on standard x-rays taken with the individual standing, if possible. The ideal film-to-camera dis- tance is 90 cm (36 in), and the beam should be at the level of and parallel to the joint surface. The estimate for the patellofemoral joint is based on a “sunrise view” taken at 40° flexion or on a true lateral view.

In the case of the knee, the joint must be in neutral flexion-extension position (0°) to evaluate the x-rays. Impairments of individuals with knee flexion con- tractures should not be estimated using x-rays because measurements are unreliable. In these indi- viduals, the range-of-motion method should be used. X-rays of the hip joint are taken in the neutral posi- tion. The cartilage interval (joint space) of the hip is relatively constant in the various positions; therefore, positioning is not as critical as for the knee x-rays.
The ankle x-ray must be taken in a mortise view, which is 10° internal rotation: 10° flexion or exten- sion is permissible. Evaluation of the foot joints requires a lateral view for the hindfoot and an antero- posterior view for the midfoot and forefoot. If there is doubt or controversy about the suitability of the


* Normal cartilage intervals are given in parentheses.
† In an individual with a history of direct trauma, a complaint of patellofemoral pain, and crepitation on physical examination. but without joint space narrowing on x-rays, a 2% whole person or 5% lower extremity impairment is given.


radiographic method in a specific individual, range- of-motion techniques may be used instead.

A person who has an intra-articular fracture and sub- sequent rapid onset of arthritis should be evaluated using the arthritis section combined with Section
17.2j on diagnosis-based estimates.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-13
15% Impairment Due to Arthritis and Malalignment From a Tibia Fracture

Subject: 48-year-old man.
History: Fell from a loading dock 23 years ago, sus- taining a right tibia fracture.
Current Symptoms: Resumed work. Over the last several years, had right knee pain toward the end of the day. Occasional mild swelling of the knee joint.
Physical Exam: The fracture healed with a 10° varus deformity of the right tibia. He has almost full range of motion of the injured knee, 0° through 125°, and mild crepitation.

The Lower Extremities	545


Clinical Studies: Standing x-rays: cartilage interval is 2 mm on the medial side of the right knee.
Diagnosis: Moderate degenerative arthritis of the right knee.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Symptoms worsen after a day’s work. The cause of pain and impairment is the development of osteoarthritis in the knee joint. Accurate x-rays are an objective way to estimate this impairment. Based on the x-rays, this individual has an 8% whole person impairment and 20% impairment of the lower extremity due to arthritis (Table 17-31). The 8% whole person impairment related to knee arthritis should be combined with an 8% whole person impairment due to the tibia fracture malalignment, 10° varus of the tibia (see Table 17- 33). Combining two 8% whole person impairments yields a 15% whole person impairment (Combined Values Chart, p. 604).
---END EXAMPLE---

17.2i Amputations
Impairments of the lower extremity due to amputa- tions are estimated according to Table 17-32.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-14
28% Impairment Due to Amputation From a Crush Injury

Subject: 35-year-old man.
History: Sustained a crush injury to the left leg in a motor vehicle accident. Below-knee amputation.
Current Symptoms: Ambulates with a below-knee prosthesis, without the need for a cane or support. Has no pain in the stump and no phantom pain.
Physical Exam: The left knee is stable, has no sign of arthritis, and has full motion.
Clinical Studies: X-rays: 13 cm (5 in) of retained proximal tibia in the stump. The stump is well healed, and he has not had any trouble with stump breakdown.
Diagnosis: Below-knee left leg amputation.
Impairment Rating: 28% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Table 17-32 shows that this condition receives a 28% whole person impairment rating. In this case, there was no concomitant knee injury. If there is an injury to the knee, or more proximal to the leg, that may also need to be rated.
---END EXAMPLE---

17.2j Diagnosis-Based Estimates
Some impairment estimates are assigned more appropriately on the basis of a diagnosis than on the basis of findings on physical examination. A good example is that of an individual impaired because of a successful replacement of a hip. This person may function well but require prophylactic restrictions of activities of daily living to prevent a further impair- ment, such as premature failure of the prosthesis.
Table 17-33 provides impairment estimates for cer- tain lower extremity impairments. For most diagno- sis-based estimates, the ranges of impairment are broad, and the estimate will depend on the clinical manifestations and their impact on the ability to per- form activities of daily living. Hip replacements should first be rated using Table 17-34 and knee replacements using Table 17-35. The points obtained from the assessment are then applied to Table 17-33 for the diagnosis impairment rating. If limb length discrepancy also exists, that impairment rating should be combined with the impairment from
the joint replacement using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).

546	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


* Refer also to Section 15.14 on the pelvis.
† See Table 17-34 or Table 17-35 for point rating system.
‡ A stress x-ray is an anterior-posterior view taken with a varus or valgus stress applied by a knowledgeable physician.
§ The tibia–os calcis angle is measured as shown in Figure 17-7.

The Lower Extremities	547


Region and Condition
Total knee replacement including unicondylar replacement
Good result, 85-100 points† Fair results, 50-84 points†
Poor results, less than 50 points†

Proximal tibial osteotomy


Whole Person (Lower Extremity) [Foot] Impairment (%)


15 (37)

20 (50)

30 (75)


Region and Condition
Loss of tibia–os calcis angle§ Angle is 120°-110°

Angle is 100°-90° Angle is less than 90°

Intra-articular fracture with displacement


Whole Person (Lower Extremity) [Foot] Impairment (%)

5 (12) [17]

8 (20) [28]

+1 (2) [3] per degree up to
15 (37) [54]


Ligamentous instability (based on stress x-rays‡)
Mild (2-3 mm excess opening) Moderate (4-6 mm)
Severe (> 6 mm)

Fracture
Extra-articular with angulation 10°-14°
15°-19°

20°+


2 (5) [7]

4 (10) [14]

6 (15) [21]


6 (15) [21]

10 (25) [35]

+1 (2) [3] per degree up to
15 (37) [53]

Moderate Severe
Avascular necrosis of the talus Without collapse

With collapse

Forefoot deformity
Metatarsal fracture with loss of weight transfer
1st metatarsal 5th metatarsal Other metatarsal

4 (10) [14]

8 (20) [28]


3 (7) [10]

6 (15) [21]


4 (10) [14]

2 (5) [7]

1 (2) [3]

Intra-articular with displacement

Hindfoot
Fracture
Extra-articular (calcaneal)

With varus angulation 10°-19°

With varus angulation 20°+

8 (20) [28]


5 (12) [17]


0.5 (1) [1] per degree up to
10 (25)

Metatarsal fracture with plantar angulation and metatarsalgia
1st metatarsal 5th metatarsal Other metatarsal


4 (10) [14]

2 (5) [7]

1 (2) [3]


With valgus angulation 10°-19°

With valgus angulation 20°+


3 (7) [11]


0.5 (2) [1] per degree up to
10 (25) [35]

548	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


The evaluating physician must determine whether diagnostic or examination criteria best describe the impairment of a specific individual. The evaluator should, in general, use only one approach for each anatomic part. There are, however, a few instances in which elements from both diagnostic and examination approaches will apply to a specific situation (see Figure 17-2). An individual with an acetabular fracture

and a sciatic nerve palsy should have estimates made for both the hip joint impairment and the nerve palsy. The estimates for the fracture and the nerve condition are then combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to provide the final impairment estimate. The final lower extremity impairment cannot exceed the impairment estimate for amputation of the extremity (100%), or 40% whole person impairment.


* Add the points from categories a, b, c, d, and e to determine the total and characterize the result of replacement. Source: modified from Gross AE, McDermott AGP, Lavoie MV, et al. The use of allograft bone in revision hip arthroplasty. In: Brand R, ed. Proceeding of the Fourteenth Open Scientific Meeting of the Hip Society. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1987:49; and Harris AH. Traumatic arthritis of the hip after dislocation and acetabular fractures: treatment by mold arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1969;51A:741-742.

The Lower Extremities	549


* The point total for estimating knee replacement results is the sum of the points in categories a, b, and c minus the sum of the points in categories d, e, and f. Modified from Insall JN, Dorr LD, Scott RD. Rationale of the Knee Society clinical rating system.
Clin Orthop. 1989;248:14.


Fractures in and about joints with degenerative changes should be rated either by using this section and combining the rating with that for arthritis (Table 17-31 and Combined Values Chart, p. 604) or by using the loss of range-of-motion method. It is rec- ommended that the method providing the greater of the two impairment estimates be used. A diagnosis of isolated full-thickness articular cartilage defects and ununited osteochondral fractures requires arthro- scopic or surgical confirmation.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-15
11% Impairment Due to a Tibia Fracture


Subject: 40-year-old woman.
History: Sustained a comminuted midshaft tibial fracture in a skiing accident. The fracture healed with shortening and angulation. She was advised of the risks of midshaft tibial osteotomy and lengthening, and she declined surgery.
Current Symptoms: Mild pain about the right knee and ankle, particularly when walking on uneven surfaces. Mild swelling of the lower leg; difficulty walking more than 5 blocks without a rest period.
Physical Exam: There is a right leg shortening of
2.5 cm. The lower leg fracture has healed with a 10° varus angle. Ranges of motion of the knee and ankle are normal.
Clinical Studies: Radiograph: healed tibia fracture with varus angulation and 2.5 cm of shortening.
Diagnosis: Healed tibia fracture with varus angula- tion.
Impairment Rating: 11% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The lower extremity impairment esti- mate for a tibia fracture that heals with a 10° varus angulation is 20% (Table 17-33), or 8% whole person impairment; the lower extremity impairment estimate for 2.5 cm of shortening, using interpolation, is 7%, or 3% whole person impairment (Table 17-4). The 8% and 3% whole person impairments are combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604). The whole per- son impairment is 11%. Impairment due to mal- union of a fracture should be estimated according to the diagnosis. Any associated muscle weakness or atrophy is included in the diagnosis-related estimates, but shortening is a separate impairment. (See cross-usage Table 17-2.) If there were an associated nerve palsy, the fracture and nerve palsy impairment percents would be combined (Combined Values Chart).
---END EXAMPLE---
550	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


17.2k Skin Loss
Full-thickness skin loss about certain areas in the lower extremity results in significant impairment, as shown in Table 17-36, even when the areas are suc- cessfully covered with an appropriate type of skin graft. Chronic osteomyelitis is also evaluated using this method.


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-16
10% Impairment Due to Skin Loss


Subject: 56-year-old man.
History: Insulin-dependent diabetic who stepped on a nail at work and developed Pseudomonas cel- lulitis of the heel. The heel pad became necrotic and required debridement. A subsequent full- thickness skin graft was successfully applied to the plantar aspect of the heel.
Current Symptoms: 1 year later, standing tolerance is limited to 45 minutes and walking tolerance is lim- ited to 1 mile. Occasional minor breakdown of the full-thickness graft. Never developed osteomyelitis or recurring infections.
Physical Exam: Normal motion in the ankle and subtalar joints. Graft site well healed.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Puncture wound with 2° infection of right heel. Status post–split thickness skin graft.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Table 17-36 indicates a 10% whole person impairment since his condition limits daily activi- ties, as well as standing and walking time. Any subsequent impairment from the diabetes should be combined with the musculoskeletal impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

17.2l Peripheral Nerve Injuries
Peripheral nerve injuries are divided into two com- ponents: motor deficits and sensory deficits. Figures 17-8 and 17-9 show the sensory and motor nerves of the lower extremity. All estimates listed in Table 17-37 are for complete motor or sensory loss for the named peripheral nerves. Partial sensory and motor deficits should be rated as in the upper extremity (Tables 16-10 and 16-11). First identify the injured
nerve and find the maximum impairment of the lower extremity due to motor deficit in Table 17-37. Grade the severity of motor deficit of the individual muscle groups innervated by that nerve according to the clas- sification given in Table 16-11. Assign a motor deficit concordant with that grade and multiply the maximum impairment value of the nerve for motor loss by the percent motor deficit to obtain the lower extremity impairment for this partial loss. Sensory deficits fol- low a similar method, as described in Table 16-10.
Motor and sensory estimates should be combined, but impairments from multiple peripheral nerve injuries should not exceed the whole person impairment from complete loss of a lower extremity (40%).

The Lower Extremities	551


552	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


Sensory deficits, including dysesthesias, are subjec- tive and must be carefully evaluated. Ideally, two examiners should agree. Estimates for peripheral nerve impairments may be combined with those for other types of lower extremity impairments, except those for muscle weakness, atrophy, and gait derangement, using the Combined Values Chart
(p. 604). See cross-usage Table 17-2.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-17
4% Impairment Due to Peripheral Nerve Injury

Subject: 22-year-old man.
History: Sustained a shrapnel-type injury at work when a part in his lathe broke and a sharp metal fragment struck him near the groin. The wound was surgically explored, and he was found to have a totally transected femoral nerve. The femoral vessels were not injured. The nerve was repaired, with return of significant function.
Current Symptoms: 2 years postinjury, walks with- out a cane or brace but with an abnormal gait, hyperextending his knee by using his hip exten- sors, just prior to weight-bearing.
Physical Exam: Decreased light touch perception in the leg in the distribution of the saphenous nerve (the distal sensory branch of the femoral nerve). This area of skin on the medial leg has retained sharp dull perception. Blisters on the medial

malleolus from his shoe rubbing on an area where the skin has decreased sensation. Quadriceps strength is judged as grade 4; moderate resistance by the examiner prevents full knee extension.
Clinical Studies: None.
Diagnosis: Partial femoral nerve palsy.
Impairment Rating: 4% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The operation report documents that the femoral nerve was injured. Examination confirms that the sensory deficit is in the saphenous nerve distribution, and the motor weakness affects the quadriceps muscle (knee extension). This is con- sistent with a femoral nerve injury with incom- plete recovery.
Sensory impairment can be rated using Tables 17-37 and 16-10. According to Table 17-37, the maximum value for a totally destroyed and non-
functioning femoral nerve due to sensory loss and pain is 9% lower extremity impairment. The sen- sory deficit and pain are forgotten with activity, so a severity multiplier of grade 4 may be chosen from Table 16-10; grade 4 includes a range of multipliers from 1% to 25%. If a multiplier of 20% is chosen, 20% of the 9% maximum value of the nerve is 2% lower extremity impairment for loss of sensation and pain.
The motor weakness impairment can be calcu- lated in a similar manner. Table 17-37 indicates that the maximal impairment for total loss of femoral nerve motor function is 37% lower extremity impairment. The exam shows that the man can move the leg through a full range of motion against gravity, but with only minimal added resistance. This is grade 4 weakness according to manual muscle testing criteria. Table 16-11 indicates that grade 4 weakness can qualify for a severity multiplier of anywhere from 1% to 25%. If a multiplier of 25% is chosen since the weakness is very significant, 25% multiplied by the 37% maximal value of the nerve for weakness yields a total of 9% lower extremity impairment.
Using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to combine the 9% lower extremity impairment for motor weakness with the 2% lower extremity impairment for loss of sensation and pain yields a rating of 11% lower extremity impairment. The 11% lower extremity impairment is equivalent to 4% whole person impairment (11% ? 0.4 = 4%).
---END EXAMPLE---
The Lower Extremities	553


17.2m Causalgia and Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy)
Causalgia is a burning pain resulting from injury of a peripheral nerve. As a term, complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is preferred to reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD) because the relation- ship to the sympathetic nervous system is uncertain. CRPS is characterized by pain, swelling, stiffness, discoloration, and skeletal demineralization, and it may follow a sprain, fracture or nerve or vascular injury. CRPS is further described in Section 13.8.
When causalgia or CRPS occurs in an extremity, the evaluator should use the method described in Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-18
39% Impairment Due to Causalgia

Subject: 32-year-old woman.
History: Fell and struck the anterior aspect of her knee; sustained a bruise with ecchymosis but no fractures when she jumped 4.5 feet from a truck dock to the ground below. She was much worse 1 month later, with “terrible pain,” swelling (edema), and a red, warm leg that sweated when no other part of her was sweating.
Current Symptoms: 2 years later, ambulating with two crutches and not bearing weight on the right leg. Constant severe pain in the leg, despite treat- ment that included all known modalities for causalgia.
Physical Exam: Leg remains swollen and pale, with skin atrophy and atrophy of the toes equivalent to “fingerprints.” On active range-of-motion testing, she does not cooperate due to pain, with very little active motion in any joint in the leg. Does not cooperate with manual muscle testing, as the test- ing provokes pain. On sensory exam, there is no loss of sensation; rather, any touching of the leg provokes severe pain (allodynia).
Clinical Studies: Bone scan postinjury: diffuse peri- articular increased uptake at the knee, ankle, and foot on the “third phase” or 3- to 4-hour delayed images. Current x-rays of the leg: only extensive osteoporosis.
Diagnosis: Causalgia, right leg.
Impairment Rating: 39% impairment of the whole person.


Comment: This case is typical of severe, type 1 CRPS, or causalgia. The leg is very difficult to examine, as traditional physical examination maneuvers such as manual muscle testing, reflex testing, sensory examination, and active range of motion all provoke complaints of severe pain and limited or no cooperation. This makes an impair- ment evaluation based on the traditional physical examination impossible. In this individual, no sin- gle peripheral nerve has been injured, and the pain involves the entire limb. Thus, trying to rate this as a peripheral nerve injury is inappropriate. No specific method described in the lower extremity or upper extremity chapters adequately covers this unique circumstance.
The pathology in CRPS is currently believed to occur in the central nervous system, so the evalua- tor should use the station and gait impairment cri- teria in Table 13-15 to rate lower extremity impairments due to lesions in the central nervous system (brain and/or spinal cord). Table 13-15 rates this individual’s impairment at 20% to 39% impairment of the whole person. Since her pain is severe and functional ADL are compromised, a 39% impairment rating is appropriate.
Comparing this woman’s status with the guide- lines for gait derangement indicated in Table 17-5 suggests that since she requires routine use of two canes or two crutches, she could be rated at 39% whole person impairment. The leg is totally non- functional; thus, she is similar to an amputee and should be rated at 39% whole person impairment. The rating of at 39% whole person impairment is thus supportable by several lines of reasoning.
---END EXAMPLE---

17.2n Vascular Disorders
Table 17-38 classifies and provides criteria for impairments due to peripheral vascular disease of the lower extremity. When amputation due to peripheral vascular disease is involved, the impairment due to amputation should be evaluated according to the cri- teria in section 17.2i, and the impairment percent should be combined (Combined Values Chart, p. 604) with an appropriate percent based on Table 17-38 for the remaining vascular disease.

554	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-19
8% Impairment Caused by Vascular Disease Due to a Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT)

Subject: 45-year-old man.
History: Sustained a closed but displaced tibial frac- ture at work. Treated with cast immobilization until the fracture healed. Postoperative course was complicated by a DVT in the injured left leg.
Current Symptoms: At MMI, 1 year postinjury, standing tolerance is described as 1 hour and walking tolerance is described as almost 1 mile. Only medication is aspirin. He has not had recur- rent venous thrombosis. Able to do most ADL.
Physical Exam: No weakness on manual muscle testing. Knee, ankle, and subtalar joints all have full motion. Chronic venous insufficiency of the left leg as a result of the DVT. The right lower extremity is normal, with no edema or varices. The left leg has 2+ pitting edema when examined in the morning, despite the use of Jobst compres- sion hose 16 hours every day. Intermittent stasis dermatitis about the ankle, but no permanent skin changes other than discoloration.

Clinical Studies: Healed fracture with no angula- tion, displacement, or shortening.
Diagnosis: Peripheral vascular disease, post-DVT, and healed tibia fracture.
Impairment Rating: 8% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Table 17-38 shows that the impairment for peripheral vascular (venous) disease can be estimated as a class 2 impairment, which ranges from 10% to 39% lower extremity impairment. He has the criterion of persistent edema of a mod- erate degree, incompletely controlled by elastic supports. The impairment can be estimated at midway between the lower and the higher impair- ment for class 2, or at 20% lower extremity impairment (20% ? 0.4 = 8% whole person impairment).
---END EXAMPLE---
The Lower Extremities	555


17.3 Lower Extremity Impairment Evaluation Procedure Summary and
	Examples
When evaluating an individual with lower extremity impairment, first obtain the person’s detailed history and perform a thorough and careful physical exami- nation, then follow the steps suggested below.

1. Establish the diagnosis.
2. Determine whether the individual has reached maximal medical improvement (MMI).
3. Identify each anatomic region of the lower extremity(ies) with abnormalities related to the illness/injury being evaluated. List potential meth- ods. Use the worksheet shown in Figure 17-10.
4. Calculate the impairment according to the text and tables for each applicable method (Table 17-1).
5. Identify and calculate impairment related to the peripheral nervous system.
6. Identify and calculate impairment related to the peripheral vascular system.
7. Identify and calculate any impairment that is related to a complex regional pain syndrome.
8. If no other methods are available, use the gait derangement method if clinically applicable; document its validity.


9. Select the most appropriate method(s) based on the history and physical examination. Use the cross-usage table (Table 17-2) to ensure only the proper methods are combined. Although dimin- ished muscle function can be evaluated by means of four methods (peripheral nervous sys- tem impairment, atrophy, manual muscle testing, or gait), use only the method that has the great- est specificity (eg, a peripheral nerve injury, if present). Anatomically based, specific methods are used to evaluate skin loss and osteomyelitis (Section 17.2k), peripheral nerve injuries (Section 17.2l), and vascular disorders (Section 17.2n). If a vascular impairment results in an amputation, any remaining vascular and amputa- tion impairments are combined. Neurologic and vascular impairments are recorded separately since they are not limited to one region of the lower extremity. Gait derangements should be used only infrequently, when other, more spe- cific measures are not appropriate.
10. If there are several alternatives, use the grouping that provides the greatest impairment percent. Convert a lower extremity impairment rating to whole person impairment using the appropriate tables. Combine whole person impairments for each injury/illness for the same extremity using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
11. If more than one leg is involved, each lower extremity is rated separately and converted to whole person; then both whole person ratings (right and left leg) are combined using the Combined Values Chart.

556	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-20
7% Impairment Due to Peripheral Nervous System Injury

Subject: 22-year-old man.
History: Fell approximately 20 feet from a ladder, injuring his right knee and left toe. Sustained an anterior cruciate ligament rupture to the right knee and a lateral meniscus tear, treated with an ante- rior cruciate ligament reconstruction and partial lateral meniscectomy. Sustained a common per- oneal nerve neuropraxia that was treated with observation and a temporary ankle/foot orthosis. Had a fracture/dislocation of the left great toe at the interphalangeal (IP) joint that required closed reduction only.
Current Symptoms: Postrehabilitation, has residual soreness in the right knee after vigorous activities and constant stiffness in the left great toe.
Physical Examination: Right lower extremity: Walks normally without support. Uses an occasional sport brace for vigorous activities, but does not require this for most ADL. The scars around the right knee are well healed. No incisional tenderness. There is no effusion or tenderness along the joint lines.
There is 1-cm atrophy of the right thigh compared to the left, as well as 1-cm calf atrophy compared to the left. Manual muscle testing is normal except for right foot evertor strength, which is 4/5. Range of motion of the right knee is from 0° to 130° of flexion, as compared to 0° to 138° on the left.
Stability testing reveals 1+ Lachman and anterior drawer and a negative pivot shift exam. Sensation is decreased to light touch in the superficial per- oneal distribution on the dorsum of the foot and is forgotten with activity. No obvious deep peroneal deficit. Left lower extremity: The only gross abnor- mality identified is great toe IP flexion, which is limited to 10°.

Clinical Studies: Based on the operative report, the individual had an anterior cruciate ligament recon- struction with a mid–one third patellar tendon graft using interference screw fixation. The report suggested that approximately one half of the pos- terior portion of the lateral meniscus had been removed. X-rays of the right knee: prior anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction, but no degenera- tive changes seen. X-rays of the great toe: healed, nondisplaced fracture of the proximal phalanx.
The joints appear normal.
Diagnosis: Residual, partial common peroneal nerve neuropraxia, status post-lateral meniscectomy.
Healed left great toe fracture
Impairment Rating: 7% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: See Box 17-1 for a step-by-step explana- tion of how this impairment rating was calculated.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-21
8% Impairment Due to Decreased Range of Motion From Hip Dislocation and Fixation

Subject: 35-year-old woman.
History: Sustained a dislocation of the right hip with severe comminution of the posterior acetabulum. Underwent open reduction and internal fixation of the posterior acetabular wall. Because of the com- minution and inability to obtain a stable fracture fixation, the surgeon elected to keep her in skele- tal traction for 4 weeks. She healed, but with some loss of joint space and significant loss of range of motion.
Current Symptoms: Aching pain in the right groin toward the end of the day, after household activi- ties and caring for her children.
Physical Exam: Walks with a slight antalgic gait on the right. Range-of-motion measurements of the hip are as follows: flexion = 50°; extension = 15°; flexion contracture, internal rotation = 20°, exter- nal rotation = 15°; abduction = 20°; adduction = 5°. There is 3 cm of atrophy of the thigh and 2 cm of atrophy of the calf.

The Lower Extremities	557


Clinical Studies: Repeat x-rays of the pelvis: only 1 mm of joint space in the right hip.
Diagnosis: Right hip dislocation with internal fixa- tion; secondary osteoarthritis.
Impairment Rating: 8% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: Range of motion, atrophy, and arthritis are the three possible methods of rating this indi- vidual’s impairment. According to Table 17-2, range-of-motion parameters should not be com- bined with either arthritis or atrophy. Use the range-of-motion method because it is more spe- cific and best characterizes the impairment.
Flexion of 50° qualifies for severe impairment according to Table 17-9. The other measurements qualify as less than severe, but since one of the measurements qualifies for severe, it should be used as the basis; the impairment is therefore 20% of the lower extremity. This converts to a whole person impairment of 8% (20% ? 0.4 = 8%).
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-22
10% Impairment Due to Limb Length Discrepancy, Malalignment of the Tibial Shaft Fracture, and Atrophy

Subject: 45-year-old man.
History: Fell from a scaffold and sustained an undis- placed tibial plateau fracture of the right leg and an open fracture of the left tibia and fibula. The open tibia/fibula fracture was treated by irrigation and debridement and internal fixation with an intramedullary Rush pin. The tibial plateau frac- ture was treated with a Bledsoe brace, locked in extension for 3 weeks, and then treated with pro- gressive mobilization.
Current Symptoms: Unable to do some activities of daily living because of pain in both legs when lift- ing or standing.


Physical Exam: Full range of motion of both knees.
There is a 12° valgus deformity of the left leg. Both knees are stable. There is 2 cm of atrophy of the left calf compared to the right. Neurovascular status of both legs is intact. No muscle weakness.
Clinical Studies: X-rays: healing of all fractures; the right knee fracture has healed without displace- ment, but the left tibial fracture has healed with 12° of valgus angulation. Teleroentgenograms:
1.5 cm of shortening.
Diagnosis: Healed right tibia plateau fracture; healed left tibia fracture with malalignment.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The undisplaced right tibia plateau frac- ture has a 5% lower extremity impairment rating, and the valgus angulation of the left tibial fracture has 20% impairment of the lower extremity according to Table 17-33. There is no further impairment rating for leg shortening since it is less than 2 cm. The individual does not receive an impairment rating for left calf atrophy according to Table 17-6 since diagnosis-based estimates are used. The left lower extremity rating of 20% con- verts to 8% whole person impairment (20% ? 0.4). The right lower extremity impairment of 5% equates to 2% whole person impairment (5% ? 0.4). Combining the 8% whole person impairment from the left leg and the 2% whole person impair- ment from the right leg equals a 10% whole per- son impairment for the injuries. The pain is accounted for in the impairment ratings.
---END EXAMPLE---
558	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-23
10% Impairment Due to Undisplaced Tibial Plateau Fracture and Peroneal Neuropathy
Subject: 55-year-old man.
History: Sustained a lateral tibial plateau and proxi- mal fibula fracture when a metal lathe threw a piece of scrap metal against his leg. Also had a complete peroneal nerve laceration. Treated with open reduction and internal fixation of the frac- ture and repair of the peroneal nerve.
Postoperatively, he was placed in a locked Bledsoe brace for 3 weeks and then was progres- sively mobilized. The fracture healed without deformity, but there was only partial return of nerve function.
Current Symptoms: Aching along the lateral side of the leg. Walks without a brace but has a slight steppage gait, and when walking long distances, prefers to use an AFO.
Physical Exam: 2° limitation in the extension of the knee; flexes to 100°. No malalignment. There is
2.5 cm of atrophy of the calf. Knee ligaments are stable. Numbness on the lateral side of the lower leg and foot that is judged to be grade 2 according to Table 16-12. He has weakness of the peroneal innervated muscles that is judged to be grade 3 according to Table 16-11.
Clinical Studies: Radiograph: healed tibial and fibula fracture.
Diagnosis: Undisplaced tibial plateau fracture; per- oneal neuropathy.
Impairment Rating: 10% impairment of the whole person.

Comment: According to Table 17-33, this individual receives a 5% lower extremity impairment for the undisplaced tibial plateau fracture. According to Table 17-2, the rater should not use atrophy in conjunction with a diagnosis-based estimate.
The neurologic deficit requires a separate rating. Table 16-10 states that a grade 4 sensory lesion results in a 1% to 25% sensory deficit. Since this man has considerable numbness, he is rated at 25%. Multiplying the 25% by the 5% assigned from Table 17-37 for a complete common per- oneal sensory deficit equals 1.25%, rounded down to a 1% sensory deficit. Table 16-11 states that a grade 3 motor lesion equates to a 26% to 50% deficit. Since the man must wear a brace part- time, 50% is appropriate. Multiplying that 50% by the 42% from Table 17-37 for a complete common peroneal motor deficit equals 21%.
Combining the 1% lower extremity impairment for the sensory deficit with the 21% lower extrem- ity impairment for the motor deficit results in 22% lower extremity impairment for the nerve injury. Combining the 5% lower extremity impair- ment for the fracture and the 22% impairment for the nerve injury results in a 26% lower extremity impairment, or a 10% whole person impairment (26% ? 0.4 = 10.4%, or 10%).
---END EXAMPLE---
The Lower Extremities	559


---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-24
15% Impairment Due to Hip Replacement
Subject: 35-year-old woman (same individual as in Example 17-21).
History: The individual described in Example 17-21 developed progressive arthritis of the hip and underwent total hip arthroplasty. She is now 2 years postoperative and is seen for repeat impair- ment evaluation.
Current Symptoms: Slight pain, and walks with a slight limp. Climbs stairs normally, puts on socks and shoes with difficulty because of persistent limitation of flexion and limited external rotation, sits unlimited amounts of time, and does not use public transportation, although she thinks she could. Never uses a cane and can walk six blocks without stopping. Has difficulty doing activities with her family.
Physical Exam: Continued atrophy of the thigh and calf. A flexion contracture of 15°. No other con- tractures, and her leg lengths are equalized.
Flexion is 90°, abduction is 20°, adduction is 10°, external rotation is 20°, and internal rotation is 20°.
Clinical Studies: Hip replacement well positioned.
Diagnosis: Hip replacement.
Impairment Rating: 15% impairment of the whole person.


Comment: According to Table 17-2, atrophy should not be considered if the diagnosis method is used (Table 17-34). The individual is assigned 40 points for pain, 8 points for a slight limp, 11 points for not using a cane, and 8 points for being able to walk six blocks. She is also assigned 4 points for stair climbing, 2 points for difficulty putting on socks, 4 points for unlimited sitting ability, and 1 point for the ability to use public transportation. She has a fixed flexion contracture without leg length discrepancy, so she receives an additional 3 points for deformity. For range of motion, she receives no points for flexion motion but receives 1 each for the other four motions (given the flexion contracture). That totals 85 points. According to Table 17-33, the impairment is 37% lower extremity or 15% whole person.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 17-25
25% Impairment Due to Transmetatarsal Amputation


Subject: 60-year-old man.
History: Caught his right foot in a construction ditch with a machine operating and sustained a mangled foot. Treated with debridement and internal fixa- tion of multiple fractures of the metatarsals, os calcus, and ankle. The forefoot became infected and required a transmetatarsal amputation. He finally healed, but he had significant residual stiff- ness of the foot. Was unable to do heavy work.
Current Symptoms: Stiffness in the foot and ankle. Able to walk in lace-up shoes with a shoe insert. Limps and has atrophy of the calf. Unable to stand for sustained periods of time without pain.

560	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


Physical Exam: Multiple scars, all healed. Ankle flexion contracture of 10° and can plantar flex to 25°. Fixed valgus deformity of the os calcus measuring 15°. No further inversion from 15°.
Clinical Studies: Radiographs: healed foot and ankle fractures with valgus deformity.
Diagnosis: Healed transmetatarsal amputation.
Impairment Rating: 25% impairment of the whole person.
Comment: The amputation results in an impairment of 57% of the foot or 40% of the lower extremity according to Table 17-32. Impairments other than the amputation need to be considered. According to Table 17-13, the heel deformity results in a lower extremity impairment of 25%. Since this is a deformity, subtalar motion is not considered.
Loss of ankle dorsiflexion, according to Table 17- 11, results in a lower extremity impairment of 15% (moderate). Combining the 40%, the 25%, and the 15% results in a lower extremity impair- ment of 62%. By multiplying the lower extremity impairment by 0.4, a whole person impairment of 24.8%, or 25%, is obtained.
---END EXAMPLE---
Notice that to calculate the lower extremity impair- ment, all the impairment ratings must be calculated for the lower extremity. Thus, the lower extremity amputation impairment rating must be used, not the foot impairment rating. Calculating the whole person impairment by combining the lower extremity impairments and multiplying by 0.4 should be the same as converting each lower extremity impairment to whole person impairment and then combining the whole person impairments. In cases where they are not equal, the evaluator should use the higher rating.

The Lower Extremities	561


DBE = diagnosis-based estimates; DJD = degenerative joint disease (arthritis).

562	Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment


Box 17-1 Choosing a Lower Extremity Impairment Rating


1. Establish the diagnosis.

Right Lower Extremity
Anterior cruciate ligament tear; lateral meniscus tear; com- mon peroneal nerve neuropraxia.
Left Lower Extremity
Fracture/dislocation, left great toe IP joint.


2. Determine whether MMI has been reached.

Right Lower Extremity
Right lower extremity injuries meet definitional requirements and MMI.
Left Lower Extremity
Left lower extremity injuries meet definitional requirements and MMI.


3. Identify each lower extremity anatomic region with abnormalities that are related to illness/ injury in question. List potential methods.

Right Lower Extremity Thigh—Atrophy Knee—Diagnosis-based estimate Calf—Atrophy
Left Lower Extremity
Great toe—Range of motion


4. Calculate impairment according to text and tables for each applicable method.

Right Lower Extremity
Thigh atrophy—3% impairment of the lower extremity (1% whole person impairment); see Table 17-6.
Partial lateral meniscectomy—2% impairment of the lower extremity (1% whole person impairment); see Table 17-33.
Calf atrophy—3% impairment of the lower extremity (1% whole person impairment); see Table 17-6.
Anterior cruciate laxity, mild—7% impairment of the lower extremity (3% whole person impairment); total diagnosis-based estimate combines 7% (ACL laxity) with 2% (for partial menisectomy) for a lower extremity diagnosis estimate of 9%.
Left Lower Extremity
Great toe range of motion—2% impairment of the lower extremity (1% whole person impairment); see Table 17-14.
5.
Identify and calculate illness/injury related to peripheral nervous system impairment.

Right Lower Extremity
Partial common peroneal nerve injury with some motor and sensory residuals.
Motor: According to Table 16-11, 4/5 evertor strength would allow for 25% of the motor value of the involved nerve (25% of 15% lower extremity impairment [see Table 17-37]) or approximately 4% of the lower extremity.
Sensory deficits: Partial; able to do all activities of daily liv- ing. Using Table 16-10 from The Upper Extremities as a guide, take the sensory deficit in the 25% sensory deficit cat- egory. This would be 25% of the total value of superficial peroneal nerve (7% is total value), which results in an impair- ment of approximately 2% of the lower extremity for partial sensory loss. Combine motor and sensory losses for total peripheral nerve impairment, which would be 4% of the lower extremity for motor losses and 2% for partial sensory losses, for a total rating of 6% of the lower extremity.
Left Lower Extremity
None.


6. Identify and calculate all illness/injury related to the peripheral vascular system.

Right Lower Extremity
None.
Left Lower Extremity
None.


7. Identify and calculate all injury impairment related to CRPS.

Right Lower Extremity
None.
Left Lower Extremity
None.

The Lower Extremities	563


8. If no other method is available, then determine impairment due to gait derangement if clinically applicable.

Right Lower Extremity
Not applicable.
Left Lower Extremity
Not applicable.


9. Consult lower extremity cross-usage table (Table 17-2) to determine possible method groupings.

Right Lower Extremity
Methods used: Atrophy; diagnosis-based estimate; peripheral nervous system.
Possible groupings: Atrophy alone; diagnosis-based esti- mate and peripheral nervous system.
Left Lower Extremity
Range of motion only method available; no specific grouping used since single parameter present.


10. Consider all medical data available and select the largest and most clinically appropriate methods for each illness/injury; combine each parameter within each individual grouping in order to determine impairment for each leg. Numeric figures should be in whole person units.

Right Lower Extremity
Use diagnosis-based estimate combined with peripheral nerv- ous system injury. That is, combine 9% impairment of the lower extremity with 6% impairment of the lower extremity, which results in an impairment rating of 14% of the right lower extremity for this illness/injury.
Left Lower Extremity
Range of motion is the only parameter available; for that rea- son, the rating is 2% impairment of the left lower extremity.


11. Use the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) to combine whole person impairments from each regional impairment calculated in step 10 of the same limb. This allows the examiner to determine the lower extremity rating for that particular extremity. The lower extremity impairment rating for each limb is then converted to whole person impairment using Table 17-3. If both lower extremities are involved, the impairment rating for each extremity is first converted to a whole person impairment before being combined with
the whole person impairment for the contralateral extremity.


Right Lower Extremity
Final impairment is 14% of the lower extremity as the only condition being rated due to the injuries to the knee and common peroneal nerve. Therefore, the 14% lower extremity impairment is converted to 6% whole person impairment.
Left Lower Extremity
The IP fracture/dislocation was the only illness/injury rated in the left lower extremity. Therefore, the 2% lower extremity impairment rating does not need to be combined with any other illnesses/injuries in the left lower extremity. The final rating is 2% of the lower extremity or 1% whole person impairment.


Now that the lower extremity impairment rating for each limb has been converted to a whole person impair- ment rating, the two whole person ratings for each limb are then combined to give the final whole person impairment for this particular individual. The 6% whole person impairment for the right lower extremity is combined with 1% whole person impairment for the left lower extremity, resulting in a total whole person impairment rating of 7%.






================================================================================
Chapter 18: 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Pain
18.1 Principles of Assessment
18.2 Overview of Pain
18.3 Integrating Pain-Related Impairment Into the Conventional Impairment Rating System
18.4 Behavioral Confounders
18.5 How to Rate Pain-Related Impairment: A Sample Protocol
18.6 Psychogenic Pain
18.7 Malingering
18.8 Conclusion
18.9 Case Examples
Introduction
This chapter provides information that will enable physicians to understand pain and develop a method to distinguish pain that accompanies illnesses and injuries from pain that has become an autonomous process, and provide physicians with a qualitative method for evaluating permanent impairment due to chronic pain.

This chapter has been completely revised from the fourth edition. Its new features include (1) an overview of pain; (2) a discussion of the complexity of assessing impairment due to pain; (3) a review of situations in which pain is a major cause of suffering, dysfunction, or medical intervention rather than a part of injuries and illnesses of specific organ sys- tems as covered in other chapters of the Guides; (4) a qualitative method for evaluating impairment due to chronic pain; and (5) a description of when to use the methods described in this chapter and how they can be integrated with the impairment rating methods used in other chapters of the Guides.


565


Physicians need to use their clinical judgment as to what constitutes normal or expected pain in condi- tions that produce widely variable amounts of pain; a herniated lumbar disk, for example, may be com- pletely painless or incapacitatingly painful. This chapter focuses on those situations in which the pain itself is a major cause of suffering, dysfunction, or medical intervention. Pain as considered in this chap- ter is persistent, which is not to say that it is refrac- tory to all treatment, but that it is likely to be permanent and stationary.


18.1 Principles of
	Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for per- forming and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.

It is considerably more difficult to provide a method for assessing chronic, persistent pain than acute pain. In chronic pain states, there is often no demon- strable active disease or unhealed injury, and the autonomic changes that accompany acute pain, even in the anesthetized individual, are typically absent. Historically, it was assumed that pain derived from underlying peripheral tissue pathology and that its severity should correlate highly with the identified pathology. Current research, however, shows that pain perception is less a moment-to-moment analy- sis of afferent input than a dynamic process influ- enced by the effects of past experiences. Sensory stimuli act on neural systems that have been modi- fied by earlier inputs, and the output of these sys- tems is significantly influenced by the “memory”
of these prior events.


18.2  Overview of Pain
18.2a Definitions
Pain is defined by the International Association for the Study of Pain1 as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage or described in terms of such damage.”

Pain is a plural concept with biological, psychologi- cal, and social components. Its perception is influ- enced by cognitive, behavioral, environmental, and cultural factors. At first glance, it seems at odds with scientific medicine because of the difficulty account- ing for it with obvious pathophysiologic changes.

Pain is subjective. Its presence cannot be readily val- idated or objectively measured. Physicians are con- fronted with ambiguity as they attempt to assess the severity and significance of chronic pain in their patients. In large part, this stems from the fundamen- tal divide between a person who suffers from pain and an observer who attempts to understand that suf- fering. Observers tend to view pain complaints with suspicion and disbelief, akin to complaints of dizzi- ness, fatigue, and malaise. As Scarry remarked, “To have great pain is to have certainty, to hear that another person has pain is to have doubt.”2

The concept of chronic pain as an extension of acute nociceptive pain is not valid. Chronic pain is an evolving process in which injury may produce one pathogenic mechanism, which in turn produces oth- ers, so that the cause(s) of pain change over time.
Support for this concept includes evidence that pri- mary afferent discharge actually has the ability to injure or kill spinal inhibitory neurons (excitotoxic- ity), leading to hyperexcitability due to disinhibition. Peripheral nerve injury can initiate evolving abnor- malities in spinal cord neurons, which in turn gener- ate abnormal responsiveness of thalamic neurons, which in turn generate cortical dysfunction. In time, these higher-level abnormalities may become inde- pendent of the abnormalities that produced them.3

Even in situations that might be expected to provide clear correlations between perceived pain and identi- fied peripheral pathology, there are perplexing obser- vations. For example, in up to 85% of individuals who report back pain, no pain-producing pathology can be identified4; conversely, some 30% of asympto- matic people have significant pathology on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)5 and computed tomo- graphic (CT) scans6 that might be expected to cause pain. Headache is another common disabling condi- tion in which impairment must be assessed primarily on the basis of individuals’ reports of pain rather than on tissue pathology or anatomic abnormality. The reason is straightforward: in the majority of cases there is no demonstrable tissue pathology. Thus, pain can exist without tissue damage, and tissue damage can exist without pain. In summary, there is no “pain thermometer,” that is, no biological measure that cor- relates highly with individuals’ complaints of pain.


18.2b Impact of Pain on Population Health and Disability
Pain is among the most common reasons for seeking medical attention, accounting for more than 70 mil- lion office visits to physicians each year.7 It is also the most common cause of disability, with chronic low back pain alone accounting for more disability than any other condition, resulting in nearly 150 mil- lion lost work days in 1988.8 Disability related to back pain has increased dramatically, although there is no reason to suspect that back problems by them- selves have increased.9,10 Headache disorders are also a major cause of work loss.11 Despite advances in physiologic understanding, surgical interventions, and pharmacologic therapies, the prevalence of chronic pain shows no signs of abating and continues to be of epidemic proportions. Notwithstanding this fact, the importance of pain is often discounted.
Morris has averred that pain reported by somebody else falls into the category we reserve for whatever is invisible, subjective, immaterial, and therefore unreal.12 A 1987 report of the Social Security Administration opined that it is impossible to under- stand the pain that another person is suffering.13

Pain is an essential determinant of the incapacitation of many individuals who undergo impairment evalu- ation. As observed by the Institute of Medicine Committee on Pain and Disability and Chronic Illness Behavior,14 “The notion that all impairments should be verifiable by objective evidence is admin- istratively necessary for an entitlement program. Yet this notion is fundamentally at odds with a realistic understanding of how disease and injury operate to incapacitate people. Except for a very few condi- tions, such as the loss of a limb, blindness, deafness, paralysis, or coma, most diseases and injuries do not prevent people from working by mechanical failure. Rather, people are incapacitated by a variety of unbearable sensations when they try to work.”

When pain persists, it has the capacity to dominate a person’s existence, contributing to significant impair- ment, reduction in the quality of life, functional limi- tations, and disability. The ravages of chronic pain often extend beyond the person who has it, as the lives of family members are often dominated by the pain of a loved one. Indeed, the children of individu- als with chronic pain are at risk for suffering a simi- lar fate.15 In addition to the human costs, chronic pain is extremely costly to society. Medical expenditures for pain-related assessment and treatment, indemnity costs, loss of productivity, and loss of tax revenues are estimated to be $125 billion each year in the United States.16
18.2
c Medical Advances in Understanding and Managing Pain Behavioral/Psychological
Several major currents of thought and investigation in the last three decades have profoundly altered medical understanding of pain and its associated behaviors. The first was the behavioral hypothesis that much of the behavior associated with chronic pain was not intrinsic to a disease or injury but, rather, reflected environmental contingencies.17 This development led to the introduction of powerful clin- ical interventions, but it had the unfortunate effect of increasing skepticism about the validity of the suffer- ing in those with persistent pain.

The considerable role of cognitive factors and coping skills in augmenting and mitigating the suffering and dysfunction of chronic pain has been compellingly demonstrated. These insights have provided the foundation of efficacious treatments.18

Associated with these developments has been the introduction of the term chronic pain syndrome (CPS) into common parlance. Although not official nomen- clature, it is frequently used to describe an individual who is markedly impaired by chronic pain with sub- stantial psychological overlay.19 CPS is largely a behavioral syndrome that affects a minority of those with chronic pain. It may best be understood as a form of abnormal illness behavior that consists mainly of excessive adoption of the sick role. The term is useful in that it properly directs therapy toward the reversal of regression and away from an exclusive focus on elimination of nociception. It does not, however, sub- stitute for a careful diagnosis of the physiologic, psy- chological, and conditioning components that comprise the syndrome. The term CPS must be used with caution, as grouping pain problems together under a generic disorder may mask and leave untreated important physiologic differences.


Neurophysiologic
A second major current has derived from explosive growth in our understanding of the pathophysiology of pain, which has rendered many older concepts unten- able. Processes of peripheral and central sensitization have been clarified, along with such phenomena as the development of adrenergic sensitivity in injured noci- ceptive fibers and the accumulation of ion channels at sites of nerve injury, all of which may produce severe pain in response to trivial stimulation. Processes have been identified by which unilateral inflammation, trauma, or illness can lead to pain and sensitivity in uninvolved, often contralateral, structures. Physiologic


processes underlying such symptoms, which were often dismissed as “not real,” have been found at the level of the dorsal horn, thalamus, and sensory cortex. Intense stimulation and peripheral nerve damage have been found to induce persistent changes in the spinal cord that, over time, alter the receptive field mapping and the phenotype of neurons rostral to them, which in turn may induce changes at the cortical level. These findings are of major import. They demonstrate that pain need not be symptomatic of a disease or injury but, in fact, can become a disease unto itself.

A major implication of recent research on sensitiza- tion is that the failure of medical and surgical investi- gation to account for a given pain may result not from looking in the wrong place, but from looking at the wrong time. That is, the investigations may be directed toward the organ or body part that was his- torically responsible for the individual’s pain, but they may be unrevealing because the pain, having been initiated by an injury or illness in the past, is now relatively independent.

Although sensitization of the peripheral and central nervous system has been demonstrated repeatedly in basic neuroscience research, there are currently no widely accepted methods for determining whether the symptoms of an individual with chronic pain can be ascribed to sensitization. Thus, while the concept of sensitization is extremely important to a concep- tual understanding of chronic pain, there is currently no systematic way to incorporate it into impairment ratings.


Implications
The scientific advances described above have impor- tant implications for the assessment of pain-related impairment. The AMA Guides as a whole embodies the premise that injuries and illnesses cause deficits in the functioning of organs or body parts, and these deficits can be quantitatively assessed during an impairment evaluation. In the simplest situations, an individual experiences a definite biological insult that creates a clear-cut abnormality in his or her bio- logical functioning. This abnormality, in turn, leads directly to deficits in activities of daily living (ADL) that can be quantified during the course of an impair- ment evaluation. An example is an individual who sustains a below-elbow amputation in a sawmill accident.

The behavioral concept of CPS and the neurophysio- logic concept of peripheral or central nervous system sensitization imply that pain and pain-related activity restrictions may be dissociated from the biological insult to which a person was exposed and from any measurable biological dysfunction in that person’s organs or body parts. Both concepts thus challenge the assumed linkages among biological insult, organ or body part dysfunction, and ADL deficits that are fundamental to the AMA rating system.

Physicians differ sharply in the way in which they conceptualize the relations among biological insult, measurable organ or body part dysfunction, and self- reported activity limitations in individuals with chronic pain. Some physicians have a low threshold for using diagnoses like “chronic pain syndrome” or “psychogenic pain” to describe these people. The diagnoses highlight the lack of association between the complaints of the individuals and any well- defined biological abnormality.

Other physicians attempt to link the complaints of pain patients to a biological abnormality. In general, they do this by employing one of two strategies. The first is to view the person as having an atypical pres- entation of a well-accepted syndrome. For example, thoracic outlet syndrome is a well-recognized condi- tion that can be caused by measurable abnormalities in arterial, venous, or neural structures in the thoracic outlet. Some physicians view people with chronic pain and paresthesias in an upper extremity as having a variant of thoracic outlet syndrome, even though vascular studies and electrodiagnostic studies are either normal or equivocal.20 The other strategy is to construct diagnoses based on the person’s symptoms and on subjective physical examination findings. The assumption of physicians employing this strategy is that a biological underpinning for the symptoms exists, but that medical science has not yet identified it. For example, the diagnosis of fibromyalgia is based on individuals’ reports of widespread pain and their reports of tenderness during physical examina- tion. Despite extensive research, no specific underly- ing biological abnormality has been discovered to explain the reports of these people.


Acrimonious debates have occurred between physi- cians who favor biological explanations for contro- versial pain syndromes and those who construe the syndromes as dissociated from any definable biologi- cal abnormality. The interpretation has significant practical implications because many of the adminis- trative agencies that provide benefits for people
with impairments emphasize the importance of
(1) objective findings of biological dysfunction and
(2) a clear causal link between an index injury and an individual’s present symptoms and findings.
If a painful condition is construed as a CPS or a psychogenic pain syndrome, both of these criteria are violated.

The distinction between well-accepted conditions and those that are ambiguous or controversial is itself ambiguous. Sometimes disagreements arise about individuals with atypical presentations of well-recognized painful syndromes. The example of thoracic outlet syndrome was given above. Another example is a person with chronic low back pain,
vague symptoms in one lower extremity, and an MRI with questionable compromise of a lumbar nerve root. The person might be described as having an atypical presentation of a lumbar radiculopathy; an alternative assessment is that the individual has a nonspecific chronic pain syndrome involving the low back. In other instances, disagreements center around the validity of the diagnostic procedures used to diagnose conditions. For example, a practitioner of manual medicine might ascribe an individual’s back pain to a lumbar subluxation or torsion of the ilium, whereas physicians not practiced in manual medicine might discount these diagnoses because they do not accept the validity of the physical exami- nation maneuvers underlying them. Finally, as in the case of fibromyalgia, reliable diagnostic criteria exist, but physicians disagree about whether the condition diagnosed by use of these criteria has a specific, definable biologic basis.

The controversies described above cannot be resolved in this chapter of the Guides for the simple reason that the medical community has not achieved consensus about how to construe such conditions as myofascial pain syndrome, fibromyalgia, and “dis- puted neurogenic” thoracic outlet syndrome.20 A practical approach for performing impairment ratings on individuals with ambiguous or controversial syn- dromes is given below.
18.3
Integrating Pain- Related Impairment Into the Conventional Impairment Rating
	System
There are several difficulties associated with inte- grating pain-related impairment into an impairment rating system such as the Guides. A basic challenge for a system of rating pain-related impairment is to incorporate the subjectivity associated with pain into an impairment rating system whose fundamental premise is that impairment assessment should be based on objective findings. The inherent subjectivity of pain is incongruent with the Guides’ attempts to assess impairment on the basis of objective measures of organ dysfunction, as it requires that determina- tions of pain intensity and the restrictions imposed by it must be largely based on patients’ reports.

A second issue is that an individual’s pain behaviors are influenced by his or her social environment.
Impairment ratings are usually performed not to establish academic facts or to make treatment deci- sions but, rather, to establish the financial obligations of payers to individuals or, conversely, the entitle- ments of individuals to monetary rewards. Thus, the social context surrounding impairment ratings might provide an incentive for individuals to exaggerate their reports of pain so as to maximize awards.
Conversely, since insurance companies and govern- ment agencies often hire the professionals who per- form impairment ratings, evaluators may have an incentive to doubt the complaints of individuals. An ideal rating system would validate the genuine suf- fering of individuals and resist influence by those who exaggerate their incapacitation for secondary gain. In the absence of objective criteria for assessing the severity and functional significance of pain, it has proved exceedingly difficult to achieve this goal.


Third, this chapter assesses pain qualitatively. Because percentages for pain-related impairment have not been used and tested on a widespread basis, as have other impairment ratings used in the Guides, it was decided that impairment ratings for pain disorders would not be expressed as percentages of whole person impair- ment. Future scientific evidence may emerge that will enable a more quantifiable approach to be adopted. Nevertheless, the value of a qualitative assessment is that any identification of a significant pain compo- nent warrants additional consideration when inter- preting impairment ratings used for allocation of medical resources, work placement, or financial compensation.

Finally, at a practical level, a chapter of the Guides devoted to pain-related impairment should not be redundant of or inconsistent with principles of impairment rating described in other chapters. The Guides’ impairment ratings currently include allowances for the pain that individuals typically experience when they suffer from various injuries or diseases, as articulated in Chapter 1 of the Guides: “Physicians recognize the local and distant pain that commonly accompanies many disorders. Impairment ratings in the Guides already have accounted for pain. For example, when a cervical spine disorder produces radiating pain down the arm, the arm pain, which is commonly seen, has been accounted for in the cervical spine impairment rating” (p. 10). Thus, if an examining physician determines that an individ- ual has pain-related impairment, he or she will have the additional task of deciding whether or not that impairment has already been adequately incorpo- rated into the rating the person has received on the basis of other chapters of the Guides.


18.3a When This Chapter Should Be Used to Evaluate Pain-Related Impairment
Organ and body system ratings of impairment should be used whenever they adequately capture the actual ADL deficits that individuals experience. However, the organ and body system impairment rating does not adequately address impairment in several situa- tions, discussed below.

When There Is Excess Pain in the Context of Verifiable Medical Conditions That Cause Pain Individuals in this group have pain associated with medical conditions that are verifiable by objective means. An example is an individual with a persistent lumbar radiculopathy following a lumbar diskec- tomy. Such an individual will usually have objective findings, including atrophy of the affected leg, mus- cle weakness, and MRI evidence of epidural scar- ring. An individual with these findings would receive an impairment rating of 10% on the basis of the DRE spine impairment rating system described in Chapter
15. Although the DRE rating is usually appropriate, some individuals with persistent lumbar radicu- lopathies report “excess” pain. That is, they report that their pain causes severe ADL deficits, suggest- ing a level of impairment greater than 10%. Procedures in this chapter can be used to assess this additional impairment and to classify it as mild, moderate, moderately severe, or severe.


When There Are Well-Established Pain Syndromes Without Significant, Identifiable Organ Dysfunction to Explain the Pain Individuals in this group have pain syndromes that are widely accepted by physicians based on the individuals’ clinical presentation but that are not asso- ciated with definable tissue pathology. These syn- dromes are not ratable under the conventional rating system and also they do not fit any of the other chap- ters in the Guides since there is no measurable organ dysfunction. Individuals with these well-established pain syndromes can be evaluated on the basis of con- cepts elaborated in this chapter. These individuals must have symptoms and signs that can plausibly be attributed to a well-defined medical condition. Some of the most common of these syndromes are listed in Table 18-1. The list is not comprehensive and may change as the body of medical information about various pain syndromes grows. If an examiner deter- mines that an individual has a diagnosis that is not
on the list, he or she may rate the individual’s pain-
related impairment if he or she is convinced that the diagnosed condition is well recognized and that the pain-related impairment is a consequence of the con- dition. An explanation should be provided in writing.


When There Are Other Associated Pain Syndromes
Use this chapter to evaluate pain-related impairment when dealing with syndromes with the following characteristics: (a) They are associated with identifi- able organ dysfunction that is ratable according to other chapters in the Guides; (b) they may be associ- ated with well-established pain syndromes, but the occurrence or nonoccurrence of the pain syndromes is not predictable; so that (c) the impairment ratings provided in other chapters of the Guides do not cap- ture the added burden of illness borne by individuals who have the associated pain syndromes.

---START EXAMPLE---
Examples of syndromes in this category are given in Table 18-2. Again, the list is not comprehensive, so an examiner must use his or her judgment to decide whether an individual with an unlisted condition should be placed in this category.


18.3b When This Chapter Should Not Be Used to Rate Pain-Related Impairment When Conditions Are Adequately Rated in Other Chapters of the Guides
Examiners should not use this chapter to rate pain- related impairment for any condition that can be ade- quately rated on the basis of the body and organ impairment rating systems given in other chapters of the Guides.

When Rating Individuals With Low Credibility
Since the assessment of pain-related impairment depends heavily on the verbal reports of individuals, examiners must be careful to provide ratings only for those who provide information that appears to be reasonable and accurate. The reports of individuals may lack credibility for a variety of reasons. Some people appear unable or unwilling to provide infor- mation that is sufficiently detailed for an examiner to assess pain-related impairment. The reasons for this are multiple, including psychosis, severe depression, memory deficits secondary to brain injury, and a lack of cooperation. Other individuals provide detailed information, but the validity of the information is questionable.


When There Are Ambiguous or Controversial Pain Syndromes
As noted above, physicians disagree sharply about whether individuals with chronic pain should be con- strued as having conditions with definite, albeit obscure, biologic underpinnings. The alternative is to describe these people as having CPS, psychogenic pain syndromes, or some other term implying that their pain cannot be associated with a well-accepted biologic abnormality. For purposes of this chapter, the pain of individuals with ambiguous or controver- sial pain syndromes is considered unratable.


As noted earlier, the distinctions between well- recognized conditions and ambiguous or controver- sial ones is subtle, so that no definitive list of ambiguous or controversial conditions can be given. The examining physician can, however, identify ambiguous or controversial syndromes by asking the following questions:

1. Do the individual’s symptoms and/or physical findings match any known medical condition?
2. Is the individual’s presentation typical of the diag- nosed condition?
3. Is the diagnosed condition one that is widely accepted by physicians as having a well-defined pathophysiologic basis?

If the answer to all three of the above questions is yes, the examiner should consider the individual’s pain-related impairment to be ratable and should pro- ceed according to the rating protocol described in Section 18.3d. If the answer to any of the above three questions is no, the examiner should consider the individual’s pain-related impairment to be unratable on the basis of concepts in this chapter. In that instance, he or she should still use the assessment protocol described in Section 18.3d to determine the severity and impact of the individual’s pain and report the results. That is, even if the examiner con- siders the person to have unratable pain, he or she needs to characterize the apparent pain-related impairment.

The fact that pain-related impairment may be unrat- able either on the basis of the organ and body rating system or on the basis of this chapter highlights the limits that exist in the science and practice of impair- ment evaluation. The judgment that pain-related impairment is unratable does not mean that the evalu- ating physician considers the pain to be “unreal” or fabricated. In fact, individuals with ambiguous or controversial pain syndromes may suffer from severe pain and report significant restrictions in ADL. These reports are often corroborated by information pro- vided by family members and treating physicians.
Thus, when a physician judges pain-related impair- ment to be unratable, he or she is simply asserting an inability to determine how the activity restrictions reported by an individual are linked to a disease or injury. The decision regarding how to construe these reports must therefore be administrative, not medical.

Advances in diagnostic technology and clinical expe- rience may eventually make pain-related impairment rating feasible for individuals with ambiguous or controversial pain syndromes. At the present time, however, the best option available to an examiner is to report that the individual has apparent impairment that is unratable on the basis of current medical knowledge. Insurance companies and administrative agencies that dispense benefits for impairments will need to make the final decision about how to use this information.


18.3c Administrative Issues Associated With Pain-Related Impairment
In essence, this chapter divides apparent impairment into three categories: (1) impairment ratable on the basis of the conventional rating system used through- out Guides Chapters 3 through 17; (2) pain-related impairment ratable according to concepts outlined in this chapter; and (3) pain-related impairment that is unratable according to the concepts outlined in this chapter.

There are two major reasons why these distinctions are crucial. First, agencies that provide benefits for individuals with impairments function under differ- ent legal mandates with respect to pain-related impairment. For example, workers’ compensation laws in some states mandate that pain-related impair- ment be considered in disability awards for injured workers.21 In other states pain-related impairment is not considered.22

The system described here distinguishes between an impairment rating using the organ system approach and impairment awarded on the basis of pain. This distinction permits administrative agencies to count “conventional” impairment ratings and pain-related impairment ratings on an equal footing, to discount pain-related impairment ratings, or to disregard them entirely. Similarly, the present system identifies indi- viduals with unratable pain-related impairment so that administrative agencies can make informed deci- sions about whether or not to compensate these individuals.


Second, the distinction between ratable and unratable pain-related impairment embodies a key premise of this chapter: physicians do not currently possess reli- able, valid techniques for assessing impairment asso- ciated with pain in all clinical settings. It is then more appropriate for the examining physician to describe the individual’s pain-related impairment as unratable than to give a rating that cannot be sup- ported by either scientific evidence or consensus.


18.3d How to Rate Pain-Related Impairment: Overview
The system described in this chapter relies largely on self-reports by individuals. Thus, it differs signifi- cantly from the conventional rating system, which relies primarily on objective indices of organ dys- function or failure. The present system assesses pain intensity, emotional distress related to pain, and ADL deficits secondary to pain. ADL deficits are given the greatest weight. An individual’s pain-related impair- ment is considered unratable if (a) his or her behav- ior during the evaluation raises significant issues of credibility, (b) he or she has clinical findings atypical of a well-accepted medical condition, or (c) he or she is diagnosed with a condition that is vague or controversial.

A detailed protocol for assessing pain-related impair- ment is described below and outlined in Figure 18-1.

A. Evaluate the individual according to the body or organ rating system, and determine an impairment percentage. During the evaluation, the examiner should informally assess pain-related impairment.
B. If the body system impairment rating appears to adequately encompass the pain experienced by the individual due to his or her medical condition, his or her impairment rating is as indicated by the body system impairment rating.
C.
If the individual appears to have pain-related impairment that has increased the burden of his or her condition slightly, the examiner may increase the percentage found in A by up to 3%.
D. The examiner should perform a formal pain- related impairment assessment if any of the fol- lowing conditions are met:
1) The individual appears to have pain-related impairment that is substantially in excess of the impairment determined in step A
or
2) The individual has a well-recognized medical condition that is characterized by pain in the absence of measurable dysfunction of an organ or body part (see Table 18-1 for examples)
or
3) The individual has a syndrome with the follow- ing characteristics: (a) it is associated with identifiable organ dysfunction that is ratable according to other chapters in the Guides; (b) it may be associated with a well-established pain syndrome, but the occurrence or nonoccur- rence of the pain syndrome is not predictable; so that (c) the impairment ratings provided in step A do not capture the added burden of ill- ness borne by the individual because of his or her associated pain syndrome (see Table 18-2 for examples).
E. If the examiner performs a formal pain-related impairment rating, he or she may increase the per- centage found in step A by up to 3%, and he or she should classify the individual’s pain-related impairment into one of four categories: mild, moderate, moderately severe, or severe. In addi- tion, the examiner should determine whether the pain-related impairment is ratable or unratable.


Table 18-3 Impairment Classification Due to Pain Disorders


Class 1 Mild
Pain severity, based on a combi- nation of intensity and frequency, is mild
Individual’s pain is mildly aggra- vated by performing ADL; is able to perform them with few modifications
Individual demonstrates no or only minimal emotional distress in response to his or her pain
Individual is not receiving treat- ment for pain on a regular basis
Pain-related limitations during physical examination are mild and appear appropriate; few pain behaviors (overt expressions of pain, distress, and suffering, such as moaning, limping, moving in a guarded fashion, facial grimacing) are observed during examination

Class 2 Moderate
Pain severity, based on a combi- nation of intensity and frequency, is moderate
Individual has moderate difficulty managing ADL; must make signif- icant modifications in order to perform them (eg, move to a ground floor apartment, buy a car with automatic transmission)
Individual demonstrates mild to moderate affective distress in relation to his or her pain
Individual requires ongoing med- ical monitoring and is taking medication much of the time
Individual demonstrates signifi- cant pain-related limitations on physical examination; relatively few pain behaviors appear during the examination, and they are of indeterminate appropriateness

Class 3 Moderately Severe
Pain is present most of the time and may reach an intensity of
9-10/10
Individual can perform ADL only with substantial modifications; unable to perform many routine activities (eg, driving a car)
Individual demonstrates moderate to severe affective distress in rela- tion to his or her pain
Individual receives medication to control pain on a maintenance basis
On physical examination, individ- ual demonstrates severe pain- related limitations that may make the examination difficult to per- form and results difficult to interpret
A number of pain behaviors are observed during the examination, and they appear to be congruent with organ dysfunction

Class 4 Severe
Pain is essentially continuous, with intensity reaching 9-10/10 at its worst
Individual must either get help from others for many ADL (eg, preparing food, dressing), modify them drastically (eg, stop bathing), or spend an inordinate amount of time accomplishing them (eg, 2 hours to get out of bed and dressed)
Individual demonstrates severe affective distress in relation to his or her pain and communicates the perception that the pain is completely out of control
Individual is receiving maximal pharmacologic support for his or her pain on an ongoing basis
Physical examination is virtually impossible to perform because individual is intolerant of many examination maneuvers (eg, refuses to ambulate or to allow examiner to palpate symptomatic area); a significant number of pain behaviors are observed dur- ing the examination, and they appear to be congruent with organ dysfunction


18.3e Classes of Pain-Related Impairment There are four general classes of impairment due to pain: class 1, mild; class 2, moderate; class 3, moder- ately severe; and class 4, severe (see Table 18-3).


18.3f How to Rate Pain-Related Impairment: Practical Steps
There are six steps in the pain-related impairment evaluation process, each discussed below. Several alternative methods are available to evaluate the sever- ity of pain, activity restrictions, emotional distress, and pain behaviors, some of which are discussed subsequently. One such methodology is provided
in Table 18-4. The first three parts of the protocol included in Table 18-4 rely on the individual’s

self-report. The questions may be provided to the indi- vidual to complete on his or her own, or they can be presented in interview format. If the individual is asked to complete the questionnaire on his or her own, someone should be available to answer questions and to review the completed form to make sure the indi- vidual has responded to all the items. If the individual has a question about completion of any of the items in Sections I to III, he or she should be instructed to make the best estimate possible. Although Table 18-4 provides a numerical score, this should not be misun- derstood to represent a quantitative impairment rating, but rather is used to classify individuals into the four qualitative classes. To that purpose, alternative meth- ods may be used so long as they are valid and appro- priately referred to in the report.


Table 18-4 Ratings Determining Impairment Associated With Pain


Name:		Date:

I. Pain (Self-report of Severity)
A. Rate how severe your pain is right now, at this moment
(circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
No pain	Most severe pain can imagine

B. Rate how severe your pain is at its worst (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
None	Excruciating

C. Rate how severe your pain is on the average
(circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
None	Excruciating

D. Rate how much your pain is aggravated by activity
(circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Activity does not	Excruciating following
aggravate pain	any activity

Sum score of Section I: A–D = Total pain severity/4 =

E. Rate how frequently you experience pain (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Rarely	All of the time

Add total pain severity score
(items A–D/4) to score for item E =
Total pain severity score (range from 0 to 20) =


II. Activity Limitation or Interference
A. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to walk 1 block? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Does not restrict	Pain makes it impossible
ability to walk	for me to walk

B. How much does your pain prevent you from lifting 10 pounds
(a bag of groceries)? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Does not prevent from	Impossible to lift lifting 10 pounds		10 pounds

C. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to sit for 1/2 hour? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Does not restrict ability	Impossible to sit to sit for 1/2 hour		for 1/2 hour
D.
How much does your pain interfere with your ability to stand for 1/2 hour? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Pain does not interfere	Unable to
with ability to stand at all	stand at all

E. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to get enough sleep? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Does not prevent me	Impossible
from sleeping	to sleep

F. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to
participate in social activities? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Does not interfere	Completely interferes
with social activities	with social activities

G. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to travel up to 1 hour by car? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Does not interfere with ability	Completely unable to to travel 1 hour by car		travel 1 hour by car

H. In general, how much does your pain interfere with your daily activities? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Does not interfere		Completely interferes with my daily activities	with my daily activities

I. How much do you limit your activities to prevent your pain from getting worse? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Does not limit	Completely limits activities		activities

J. How much does your pain interfere with your relationship with your family/partner/significant others? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Does not interfere	Completely interferes
with relationships	with relationships

K. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to do jobs around your home? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Does not interfere		Completely unable to do any job around home

L. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to shower or bathe without help from someone else? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Does not interfere	My pain makes it impossible to at all		shower or bathe without help


M. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to
write or type? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Does not interfere		My pain makes it at all	impossible to write or type

N. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to dress yourself? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Does not interfere		My pain makes it at all	impossible to dress myself

O. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to
engage in sexual activities? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Does not interfere	My pain makes it almost
at all	impossible to engage in any sexual activity

P. How much does your pain interfere with your ability to
concentrate? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Never	All the time

Sum score of Section II:
A-P = Total score for activity limitation/16 = Mean activity limitation =
III.
Individual’s Report of Effect of Pain on Mood
A. Rate your overall mood during the past week. (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Extremely high/good	Extremely low/bad

B. During the past week, how anxious or worried have you been because of your pain? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Not at all anxious/worried  Extremely anxious/worried

C. During the past week, how depressed have you been because of your pain? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Not at all depressed	Extremely depressed

D. 	During the past week, how irritable have you been because of your pain? (circle a number):
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Not at all irritable	Extremely irritable

E. In general, how anxious/worried are you about performing activities because they might make your pain/symptoms worse?
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Not at all anxious/worried  Extremely anxious/worried

Sum score of Section III:
A-E = Total pain impairment attributed to mood state/5 = Mean score =


Assess Whether the Individual Is at MMI This concept is particularly important in the assess- ment of pain-related impairment. A person should
not be judged medically stable, and therefore ratable, unless he or she has undergone a thorough evaluation for the entire range of factors that can affect pain
and has undergone a vigorous trial of rehabilitative treatment.

For example, there may be no further orthopedic interventions available for a lumbar pseudarthrosis. Spinal arachnoiditis may be refractory to any inter- vention. Yet in both cases, appropriate pain manage- ment may reduce all the components of impairment, with reduced pain severity, functional restoration, and mood normalization. Consultation with a spe- cialist in pain medicine may be required to determine whether the impairment is fixed or potentially useful treatments are available.

Determine the Severity of the Pain
Although absolute quantification of pain is not possi- ble, severity may be estimated using, for example, a visual analog scale, a numeric, or a box-rating scale. A horizontal or vertical line of known length is anchored by “no pain at all” at one end and “worst pain ever” at the other. A line of consecutive boxes also anchored with these end points, with a number in each one and in which the individual is asked to place an “X” in the box, may be of particular use because some people have difficulty understanding how to use a VAS scale.23 It is useful to obtain least, worst, and current levels, as well as the usual level. Exacerbating and mitigating factors should be sought. The character or quality of pain may assist with diagnosis and help establish that the pain is compatible with a known medical syndrome.


The McGill Pain Questionnaire is widely used in pain medicine. It contains lists of words chosen to reflect the sensory (eg, dull, cramping), affective (eg, agonizing, terrifying), and evaluative (eg, annoying, unbearable) components of the pain experience.24 There are also descriptors of the temporal qualities of the pain (momentary, steady, intermittent). Line drawings of the body permit the individual to shade in the location of the pain. Numeric descriptors of the overall present pain intensity are provided (1 = mild, 2 = discomforting, 3 = distressing, 4 = horrible, 5 = excruciating).


Determine Activity Restrictions
The reported severity of pain may not correlate well with its functional impact. Indeed, some individuals report well-preserved function despite pain of 9/10 in severity, while others portray a vegetative existence with a pain level of 4/10. It is essential to know the extent to which the following functions are impeded by pain: ADL, socialization, recreation, work, sleep, sexuality, and cognition.

A quasi-quantification of functional status can be derived by scoring the extent to which pain interferes with each (applicable) activity. The individual should be queried as to how often he or she leaves the home (with documentation if housebound), gets out only for medical appointments, and the like. “Down time,” the total number of hours a day the person is reclining, is a useful measure.

It is useful to provide quantification of functional limitations via accepted, standardized instruments that permit interrater comparisons. The Pain Disability Index provides 0 to 10 scales on which individuals rate pain-related interference in seven domains, including family/home responsibilities, recreation, social activity, occupation, sexual behav- ior, self-care, and life support activities (eating, sleeping, breathing).25 The SF-36 is widely used to determine the degree of functional impairment and changes in overall wellness following treatment of those with pain as well as of other populations.26 The Oswestry27 and Roland-Morris28 are brief question- naires that provide an economical office assessment of function in individuals with back pain. A large number of other instruments exist, as reported in the literature. It is also possible to correlate estimates of function to actual impairment using questionnaires and scales.

The ADL listed in Table 1-2 are commonly classified within one of eight different areas: physical activity, nonspecialized hand activities, sleep, travel, self-care and personal hygiene, sexual function, communica- tion, and sensory function.29 The first six of these are most relevant for impairment due to pain, as it is extremely rare for pain to create major restrictions in communication and sensory functioning. A number of measures have been developed to assess ADL, some of which are general and others of which are designed for use with specific diseases and injuries.30,31 Physicians may choose to select from among the available ADL scales if they wish a more detailed assessment. Although individuals may have difficulty separating the effect of specific diseases or injuries from the pain on their activities, some esti- mate is necessary to help in determining the extent of impairment due to pain that exceeds activity restric- tion due to the disease or injury. For example, an individual with a below-the-knee amputation may have some activity limitations in ambulation; he or she may have additional limitations due to severe stump pain.

Several well-established general measures have been standardized on chronic pain sufferers and have been used in numerous published studies that may be of particular use as they assess several important domains relevant to the assessment of impairment.
For example, the Sickness Impact Profile (SIP) is a widely used health status measure that has been shown to reliably assess the impact of health prob- lems on function and quality of life.32 The West Haven–Yale Multidimensional Pain Inventory (MPI)33 is another reliable and valid health status measure that has been used extensively.


Determine the Presence of Emotional Distress
An important component of chronic pain-related impairment is its associated affective distress, which often includes sadness, anger or irritability, and anxi- ety.34 In some cohorts, the depression seems to be primarily a function of life interference and cognitive changes, while in others it seems to be primarily a function of the pain itself.35 In either case, it is unnecessary that an individual meet diagnostic crite- ria for a mood, anxiety, or other psychiatric disorder for there to be substantial suffering related to such issues as pain, loss of meaningful and pleasurable life activities, and a bleak future.

It may be appropriate to use rating scales to provide some quantification of affective changes. Brief self- administered screens for depression, such as the Beck Depression Inventory,36 the Zung Depression Index,37 and rater-administered screens such as the Hamilton Self-rating Scale for Depression,38 may alert the physician to the presence of a mood disor- der that requires treatment, as well as to the possibil- ity of suicide. Similar instruments are available for anxiety and include the Beck Anxiety Scale and Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety. The Profile of Mood States (POMS),39 which has also been useful in providing quantification of various mood states in individuals with chronic pain, has scales reflecting impaired concentration, anxiety, depression, fatigue, and others.

As with pain reports, these instruments all are sub- ject to minimization or exaggeration on the part of the individual. People are seen who score four times the cutoff for depression on the Beck Depression Inventory, yet who are animated and playful in the gym. When such discrepancies occur, the weighting given the instrument should be minimal. Moreover, caution must be taken in interpreting responses on these measures, as they were not standardized on samples of individuals with medical disorders, and using the usual cutoff scores may lead to an exces- sively large number of false positives.

It is important to obtain information from the indi- vidual regarding the impact of pain on his or her mood state. As noted in the discussion of activity restrictions, it may be difficult for the individual to separate the effect of specific diseases or injuries from the pain on activities; however, the items are designed to obtain a rough estimate of the individ- ual’s beliefs.

Determine if Pain Behaviors Are Present Pain behaviors are the ways that individuals com- municate about their pain. These behaviors may be verbal or nonverbal. The individual may be unaware of them, as they may be emitted and maintained due to responses that have been received from significant others, including health care professionals. In other
instances, individuals may exaggerate their behaviors to signal pain and distress with the intent to achieve some desired response from those who observe the behaviors. Thus, both the antecedents and conse- quences of the behaviors are important.

Some individuals appear stoic as they go through evaluations, and the pain behaviors they do demon- strate are concordant with other medical information regarding their condition. In this instance, the pain behaviors provide valuable clues regarding a per- son’s diagnosis and tend to validate the fact that he or she is suffering because of the diagnosed condi- tion. For example, consider an individual with sus- pected degenerative joint disease of the hip who walks with a characteristic limp. The limp provides a clue to the diagnosis and tends to support the indi- vidual’s reports that he or she has significant pain when walking.

At the opposite extreme, an individual may demon- strate pain behaviors that appear exaggerated and discordant with his or her presumed medical condi- tion. These pain behaviors may appear to be driven by a variety of factors, such as overwhelming somatic anxiety or the person’s desire to convince an examiner that he or she is suffering greatly. The common denominator underlying them is that they do not appear to be direct, inevitable consequences of a definable medical condition. Exaggerated, dis- cordant pain behaviors tend to cast doubt on the validity of the information that people provide regarding their condition.

Thus, an examiner has a twofold task regarding pain behaviors demonstrated by a person undergoing an impairment rating: to identify the pain behaviors, and to interpret their significance, that is, to decide whether they tend to authenticate the validity of the individual’s suffering or to raise questions about his or her communication style.


It is hard to specify a generic list of pain behaviors. The behaviors to look for depend on the individual’s medical condition, examination maneuvers that are performed, previous responses obtained, and intent. Physicians probably differ significantly in what they view as exaggerated pain behaviors. Sources of vari- ation include different concepts of what represents “legitimate disease” and thresholds for calling a behavior abnormal.

Despite the limitations noted, pain behaviors provide useful information regarding both the impact of pain on observable behavior and the individual’s style of communicating (eg, demonstrative, stoic) about their pain. The physician should observe the individual’s pain behaviors as he or she enters the examination room, during the interview, and during the history taking. This will eliminate the increase in pain behaviors that might be directly associated with the physical examination.

The examiner should give a score between +10 and
–10 to indicate his or her global evaluation of an indi- vidual’s pain behavior during the interview and phys- ical examination. A positive score is given when the individual demonstrates pain behaviors that are con- cordant with the overall clinical findings and, in the opinion of the examiner, tend to authenticate his or her suffering. A negative score is given when an indi- vidual demonstrates grossly “nonorganic” or “exag- gerated” pain behaviors. A score close to 0 should be given when the examiner is uncertain about how to interpret the individual’s pain behaviors.

The specific behaviors an examiner considers vary according to the individual’s medical condition and the examination maneuvers performed. Potentially significant behaviors that commonly occur during evaluations are listed in Table 18-5. Note that the sig- nificance of pain behavior cannot be determined unless related to a particular individual and context. Thus, a pain behavior that would be considered con- cordant in one clinical context would be considered discordant in a different one. Also, note that pain behaviors that tend to validate an individual’s pain are generally specific to that person’s medical condi- tion. In contrast, exaggerated pain behaviors—such as emotional displays and pain-limited weakness— tend to occur in conjunction with a wide variety of medical conditions.

The physician can record the pain behaviors observed using the behaviors listed in Table 18-5.40 These behaviors may be viewed as indicating symp- tom magnification, especially when several are pres- ent and they grossly exceed what might be expected from individuals with a similar diagnosis. These sys- tematic observations should be used as the basis for determining a global rating regarding the presence and congruence of pain behaviors given the individ- ual’s diagnosis and organ dysfunction.


Credibility of the Individual
Physicians routinely assess the credibility of individu- als in the course of their clinical work. This kind of assessment is particularly important in the context of rating pain-related impairment because the ratings depend on verbal and nonverbal behaviors of people that are at least partly under voluntary control.
Although there are no definite rules for assessing cred- ibility, Section 18.4, Behavioral Confounders, dis- cusses several issues that a physician should consider when making a judgment about a person’s credibility.

The key question the examiner should ask is, Do the limitations that an individual describes and demon- strates accurately reflect the burden of illness he or she bears during everyday activity?


18.4 Behavioral
	Confounders
An extensive literature demonstrates what common sense suggests: pain behaviors and perception of pain are strongly influenced by beliefs, expectations, rewards, attention, and training. In the absence of a direct measure of pain, such behaviors function as markers by which pain is judged. However, volumi- nous literature demonstrates that these markers reflect social and environmental factors as much as they reflect pain. It has been shown, for example, that individual ratings of pain severity diminish when “well talk” is reinforced. With repeated identical pain stimuli, intensity reports vary with feedback. Verbal reinforcement increases performance in individuals with back pain. Studies consistently show that spouse solicitousness is correlated with pain behav- ior.41

Prospective studies consistently show that onset of disabling pain is highly associated with such factors as job dissatisfaction, lack of support at work, stress, and perceived inadequacy of income.42-45 Once initi- ated, the progression of pain to chronicity is contin- gent on similar factors.46,47 Financial compensation, receipt of work-related sickness payments, and compensation-related litigation are also associated with chronicity, as are such social and economic fac- tors as poor education, language problems, and low income. Chronicity is also favored by individual tendencies to be preoccupied with one’s body and symptoms.48,49 Even in individuals with clear-cut radicular pain from disk prolapse/protrusion, appli- cation for retirement at 6 months was best predicted by depression and daily hassles at work.50,51 In the case of injured workers, performance on functional capacity evaluation is reduced if the worker is informed that the test results will be used to deter- mine work classification.52 Industrial injuries and compensation situations appear to provide a dispro- portionate number of individuals with such issues.53,54

Although the suffering induced by a miserable voca- tional situation may equal or exceed that from dis- ease or injury, it is the intent of the Guides to assign impairment based on disease and injury, not on such environmental situations as an individual’s fear of returning to a hostile work environment. Similarly, the physician charged with assigning an impairment rating expects to discharge the obligation by assess- ing the state of the person as an organism, and he or she rightly considers such external factors as the state of the economy, the market for particular skills, and the local tolerance for language barriers to be distracters that lower the “signal-to-noise” ratio in the assessment.

Thus, examiners face a dilemma. They know that a variety of nonbiological factors strongly influence the disability status and ADL deficits of individuals they rate, but they are charged with the task of rating impairment on the basis of measurable dysfunctions of organ or body parts.


18.4a Assessing Behavioral Reliability
A primary step in radiographic interpretation is eval- uation of the quality of the image. Incorrect expo- sure, motion artifact, and other technical deficiencies may weaken the conclusions that may be drawn from the image. The principal gauge of pain is its associ- ated behaviors, which include reports. Thus, it is crit- ical that this measure of pain be assessed for reliability. Inappropriate pain behavior, embellish- ment, and symptom magnification are common, par- ticularly in medicolegal circumstances and entitlement programs. The following is a guide to their assessment.


Congruence With Established Conditions In cases of phantom pain, the individual describes pain in an absent extremity. While this might be expected to evoke incredulity, it does not because this condition has been well described for decades, long before its pathophysiology was understood.
Similarly, the person with complex regional pain syndrome (previously called reflex sympathetic dys- trophy, or RSD) may describe exquisite pain on light touch of a healthy-appearing extremity following a trivial injury. A constellation of associated signs and symptoms, such as cold sensitivity, autonomic changes, trophic changes, dystonic phenomena, and others help to confirm that the pain complaint is con- sistent with a known clinical syndrome. Intolerance of light touch over a region of the lower back in indi- viduals with mechanical low back pain is inconsis- tent with a defined disease process and thus fails to meet this criterion.

Most known conditions have such expected concomi- tants. Typically, an individual would not watch televi- sion or read while waiting for a migraine to abate, and there would be an expected response to ergots, triptans, or other antimigraine preparations. An indi- vidual with neuropathic pain will likely, but not always, show some response to certain antiepileptic drugs (eg, gabapentin, carbamazepine) or antidepres- sants (eg, tricyclics). A person with persistent pain of pancreatitis would be unlikely to gain weight.

Consistency Over Time and Situation
There is risk in placing unwarranted confidence in the validity of assessments that are numeric and therefore often considered “objective” and “scientific.” Such confidence is challenged by such observations as a person who can tolerate only 10° forward flexion while standing, yet can sit with legs outstretched and touch his or her toes. Similarly, a person may demon- strate collapsing with pain on manual testing of plan- tar flexion, yet be able to tiptoe. Others may limp on one leg walking forward, the other walking back- ward, but neither on a treadmill. Grip strength may
be measured repeatedly and coefficients of variation calculated, although these methods have been criti- cized.55 Rapid exchange grip strength testing may provide similar information.56 Isokinetic strength test- ing may discriminate between maximal and submaxi- mal effort.57 Complaints and dysfunction should be relatively independent of the observers present and should generally persist, despite distraction.


Consistency With Anatomy and Physiology Waddell’s signs are perhaps the best known of numerous indicators of pain behaviors that are more likely to be accounted for by an individual’s expecta- tions than by organic pathology.58,59 One example is that of axial rotation, in which the standing individ- ual’s hips are rotated in each direction by the exam- iner. This essentially affects only the hips and ankles, leaving the pelvis and all above it to move as a unit. Exacerbation of back pain by this maneuver is con- sidered abnormal. It is important, however, when using this method not to rate the individual on only one abnormal test and to place the response in the context of the individual’s history and physical examination.


Observer Agreement
Collateral information from relatives and other eval- uating professionals is of critical value in determin- ing the consistency of individual behaviors, which helps to confirm that their relationship is to per- ceived pain and varies little with changes in observers.


Other Inappropriate Illness Behavior
It may be difficult to judge whether or not behavior is compatible with perceived pain. For example, because one cannot know how much leg pain an indi- vidual experiences on walking, it is hard to know
whether an antalgic gait is exaggerated. Inappropriate illness behavior may be suspected, however, if an individual demonstrates dysfunction in unrelated domains. For example, except in extreme situations, an individual with back pain should not require that the spouse complete the individual’s questionnaire— or his or her sentences. Chronic pain rarely precludes making one’s own phone calls to the doctor, paying bills, etc. When a person has delegated these func- tions to others, abnormal illness behavior is likely.


18.4b Incorporating Behavioral Confounders Into Impairment Ratings Physicians should consider the confounders described in Section 18.4a when they evaluate the pain behaviors of individuals (see Determine if Pain Behaviors Are Present, Section 18.3f) and when they rate the credibility of individuals (see Credibility of the Individual, Section 18.3f).


18.4c Cautions
Although no one would conclude that because an
x-ray is of poor quality there is unlikely to be pathol- ogy of concern, this non sequitur frequently occurs in cases of aberrant pain behaviors. Such behaviors should properly cause physicians to be uncertain, but not dismissive. Behavior is affected by many factors. The appearance of symptom exaggeration can be created by fear or by having learned that certain actions or positions provoke pain. “Nonphysiologic” signs may occur in dementia. Excessive or exagger- ated pain behaviors can be a response to feeling dis- counted or mistrusted, so that one must emphasize symptoms to persuade physicians of their reality.
Anyone might dramatize a problem in an effort to have it taken seriously. Thus, symptom magnification can be an iatrogenic phenomenon that occurs when an individual feels mistrusted or poorly cared for.
18.5
How to Rate
Pain-Related Impairment:
	A Sample Protocol
As the preceding discussion indicates, a physician must rely on a wide range of clinical skills when he or she assesses pain-related impairment. Also, the discussion indicates that several different assessment instruments may be used in the course of the assess- ments. The plethora of assessment methods available can further complicate the already difficult task fac- ing the examining physician.

The protocol described below selects assessment instruments and procedures that, in the opinion of the authors, permit physicians to reach conclusions about pain-related impairment that are reliable and valid.
The specific steps in the protocol are as follows:

1. Determine whether the individual is medically stable.
2. Follow the steps outlined in Figure 18-1.
3. If a formal assessment of pain-related impairment is to be performed:
a. Have the individual complete the questionnaire shown in Table 18-4.
(1) This provides information about three domains that are relevant to pain-related impairment: severity of pain, ADL restric- tions, and emotional distress.
(2) Follow the instructions given in Table 18-6 to obtain the person’s score for each of these three domains.
b. Observe the individual’s pain behaviors throughout the evaluation. Follow the instruc- tions given in Table 18-5 to obtain the individ- ual’s score for the pain behaviors domain.
c. Make a global assessment of the person’s credi- bility, taking into consideration the factors dis- cussed in the Section 18.4. Assign a score between –10 and +10, where –10 indicates very low credibility and +10 indicates very high credibility. Enter this score in line 5 of Table
18-6. If the credibility score is less than 0, the examiner should consider the possibility of aborting the pain-related impairment assess- ment on the grounds that the individual does not meet the entry criteria given in Section 18.3b.


d. Follow the instructions given in Table 18-6 to combine scores from each of the above five domains (severity of pain, ADL restrictions, emotional distress, pain behaviors, and credi- bility) into a total pain-related impairment score. These scores are not impairment ratings but are used only to classify the individual as discussed under c.
e. Follow the instructions given in Table 18-7 to convert this total pain-related impairment score into one of the four categories of impairment described in Table 18-3 (ie, mild, moderate, moderately severe, or severe).
4. Review the material provided in Sections 18.3a and 18.3b to determine whether the pain-related impairment is ratable or unratable.
5. The final impairment rating should include the following:
a. The percentage impairment rating based on the dysfunction in the organ or body part being rated (see step A in Section 18.3d).
b. Additional impairment of up to 3% may be given if an individual has pain-related impair- ment that increases the burden of illness slightly (see step C in Section 18.3d).
c. If the individual has undergone a formal pain- related assessment:
(1) An indication of the individual’s pain- related impairment category (see 3e above).
(2) An indication of whether this impairment is ratable or unratable.
(a) If pain-related impairment is ratable, an indication of whether or not the pain- related impairment is adequately encap- sulated by the impairment rating given for organ or body part dysfunction (see Section 18.3a).

* The impairment rating score is not an impairment rating.


18.6  Psychogenic Pain
Somatoform disorders are a group of conditions characterized by physical symptoms that are not fully explained by a medical condition, the effects of a substance, or another mental disorder.60 The symp- toms are not under voluntary control. Pain disorder is diagnosed when pain is a predominant focus of the presentation and causes significant distress or impairment in important areas of functioning.
Psychological factors are judged to play a significant role in the onset, severity, exacerbation, or mainte- nance of the pain. Pain disorder associated with psy- chological factors is diagnosed when psychological factors are judged to have the major role; in this sub- type, general medical conditions play little or no role. Pain disorder associated with both psychologi- cal factors and a general medical condition is indi- cated when both psychological factors and a general medical condition are judged to have important roles in the onset, severity, exacerbation, or maintenance of the pain. The diagnoses are rather general, and almost any person with persistent pain would meet the inclusion criteria.

These current diagnostic terms appear to refer to conditions previously called conversion, hysteria, and psychogenic pain. There appears to be no fully satisfactory explanation or conceptualization of these conditions. Since pain is a perceptual experience, one could argue that all pain is a psychic phenome- non. Thus, psychogenic pain would be a tautology, much like psychogenic joy. Certainly, those processes in the dorsal horn, spinothalamic tract, and thalamus of an anesthetized person are not consid- ered pain, a term reserved for what occurs when these processes access conscious awareness in an aversive fashion.

The concept of psychogenic pain is further compli- cated by the fact that a variety of conditions formerly considered psychogenic have been found to be neuro- logically based and that its diagnostic signs have been challenged.61 Nevertheless, psychogenic pain appears to exist and probably represents several different phe- nomena. Unlike psychogenic pain, other psychogenic symptoms can be confirmed; for example, conversion blindness preserves the opticokinetic reflex, psy- chogenic seizures occur during a normal EEG record- ing, conversion anesthesia does not diminish the sensory evoked potential, and psychogenically para- lyzed extremities move during sleep. Such confirma- tion is unavailable in the case of pain.


Some individuals are seen whose symptoms resem- ble no organic condition, who have inconsistent and nonphysiologic physical findings, yet who demon- strate great distress with agitation or psychomotor retardation, inability to sleep, and a general misery that is consistent across environments and confirmed by others. Such individuals’ suffering is genuine, should not be minimized, and constitutes a risk for suicide. It is most probable that these individuals truly perceive pain, suffer with it, and are impaired.

Chapter 14, which deals with impairment associated with mental disorders, describes a system for assess- ing impairment among individuals with pain disor- ders. Examiners will sometimes be uncertain about whether to use the assessment procedures described in this chapter or the ones described in Chapter 14. They should ask the following key question when evaluating an individual whose chronic pain is not fully explained on the basis of organ pathology: Does it appear that psychological factors played a major role in the initiation of the pain syndrome or are playing a major role in its continuation? If the answer to this question is yes, the examiner should use the rating methods described in Chapter 14. If the answer is no, or if the examiner is uncertain, he or she should use the rating methods described in this chapter.


18.7  Malingering
Malingering is conscious deception for the purpose of gain. While most authorities declare that malin- gering is quite uncommon, there appear to be few data regarding its frequency. Fishbain et al reviewed literature suggesting that malingering is present in 1.25% to 10.4% of individuals with chronic pain; however, they found serious flaws with the method- ology and concluded that no conclusions could be drawn from the data.62

Other fields provide some limits regarding the preva- lence of malingering. In individuals with unex- plained intractable diarrhea, 14% had positive stool examinations for laxatives, although all had denied use of laxatives.63 Among 333 people who claimed compensation for noise-induced hearing loss, the incidence of exaggeration on hearing tests (as deter- mined by cortical evoked response audiometry) was 17.7%.64 Weintraub cites studies showing that 20% to 46% of people consider purposeful misrepresentation of compensation claims to be acceptable behavior.65


These studies suggest that factitious illness and malingering may not be rare, but they do not provide information as to how often these conditions simu- late pain. They do suggest that evaluators keep an open mind as to the possibility of these phenomena, which are probably less likely in those seeking treat- ment than in those seeking compensation.

Confirmation of malingering is extremely difficult and generally depends on intentional or inadvertent surveillance. Anecdotes abound of providers running into wheelchair-bound individuals strolling about a mall or encountering an individual in the parking lot holding a cane in the air and demonstrating a normal gait. By definition, malingering is not a disease but a volitional deception. It thus requires no treatment.

18.9 Case Examples


18.8  Conclusion
The assessment of pain-related impairment consti- tutes a substantial challenge, as it is the most com- mon reason for disability, the most subjective, and perhaps the most multifaceted. Equitable quantifica- tion of impairment requires attention to subjective experiences of pain and emotional distress, as well as reports of behavioral impairment, all of which can only be confirmed indirectly. At times, it seems to present the dilemma of being too difficult to perform and too essential to omit.

Despite these obstacles, it appears that each of the components of pain can, in most cases, be assessed with good reliability if a meticulous evaluation is performed that includes observation and collateral information. In this way, the interests of individuals who hope to achieve validation of their symptoms and payers who hope to avoid indiscriminate finan- cial obligations can be fairly addressed.

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 18-1


Subject: 28-year-old woman.
History: Individual who is otherwise healthy experi- ences approximately 20 severe headache events per year.
Current Symptoms: Each headache event begins at night and reaches maximal intensity within 2 to 3 hours. Untreated, average duration is 8 to 12 hours. Headache is associated with severe nausea and vomiting, light-headedness, moderately to severely blurred vision, and diarrhea. Woman is completely asymptomatic between headaches.
Physical Exam: Generally healthy woman.
Neurologic examination and past medical history are otherwise normal. Using Table 18-4, the pain intensity score is 6.
Activity Interference (based on protocol described in Table 18-4): Woman is able to per- form all ADL, having some difficulties only dur- ing the headache episodes. Activity limitations score is 5.
Emotional Distress (based on protocols described in Table 18-4): She reports moderate emotional distress and is concerned about her ability to meet role and responsibilities. The emotional distress score is 4.
Pain Behaviors (based on Table 18-5): No pain behaviors demonstrated; pain behavior score is 0.
Credibility: Credibility score is +5.
Diagnosis: Migraine.


Impairment Rating: Based on the procedures described in Tables 18-4 through 18-7, the indi- vidual’s total pain-related impairment score is 20. She is therefore classified as having mild pain- related impairment. No ratable impairment based on organ or body part dysfunction.
Comment: During her attacks, this woman is com- pletely impaired by the severity of her pain, its accompaniments, and the treatment that is required to relieve symptoms. Impairment is inter- mittent, lasting only the duration of the attack and the effects of the medication. She is otherwise unimpaired.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 18-2

Subject: 42-year-old man.
History: Individual developed right carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) 2.5 years ago while working as a cement mixer. Underwent CTS release 2 months after onset of symptoms. Postoperatively, devel- oped swelling of right hand, along with severe, diffuse pain. Was diagnosed with RSD. Has failed stellate ganglion blocks, numerous medication tri- als, and a vigorous physical therapy program.
Current Symptoms: Pain in the right hand and fore- arm, which can extend up to the shoulder. Pain constant at 3-5/10 when inactive. Increased pain and severe swelling of hand with any vigorous right upper extremity (RUE) activity. Based on Table 18-4, pain severity score is 10.

Physical Exam: Dramatic swelling of right hand, along with discoloration and excessive sweating. Range of motion (ROM) of fingers markedly reduced secondary to swelling. Mild hypersensi- tivity to tactile stimulation of hand. No sensory loss. Demonstrates pain-limited weakness in all muscle groups of distal RUE.
Activity Interference (based on protocol described in Table 18-4): Activity limitation score is 18. Unable to use RUE for any physically demanding activities.
Emotional Distress (based on protocol described in Table 18-4): Severely depressed over ongoing pain and work disability; frequent thoughts of sui- cide. Emotional distress score is 10.
Pain Behaviors (using the global rating in Table 18-5): A number of pain behaviors that appeared inconsistent with the diagnosis of CTS or RSD were observed, including guarded and protective movements of the lumbar spine and the left upper extremity. These behaviors were judged to be excessive and incongruent with the diagnosed conditions and were rated –7.
Credibility: Moderate; credibility score is +3.
Diagnosis: CTS and RSD.
Impairment Rating: (1) Conventional: 22% whole person impairment due to markedly restricted ROM of all digits of the right hand. (2) Pain related: Using protocol described in Tables 18-4 through 18-7, the individual is assigned a total pain-related impairment score of 28, correspon- ding to moderate pain-related impairment. The pain-related impairment is felt to be ratable and to be adequately encapsulated within the impairment rating in the conventional impairment rating described above.
Comment: In RSD, impairment is typically second- ary to pain and is not easily encompassed by the conventional impairment rating system. This per- son is unusual in that the swelling and consequent reduced ROM of the fingers was ratable.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 18-3

Subject: 45-year-old man.
History: History of nine lumbar surgeries over a
15-year period. Started with an L4-5 diskectomy; now is fused from L2 to the sacrum.
Current Symptoms: Low back pain with intermit- tent radiation into proximal right lower extremity. Also has pain wrapping around his flanks in an L2 distribution and numbness in an S1 pattern in the left lower extremity. Baseline pain is present daily and is described as 4/10 in intensity. About 10 flare-ups per year during which he is confined to bed for several days. On the basis of Table 18-4, pain intensity score is 12.
Physical Exam: Stands leaning forward and to the right; is unable to achieve an erect posture.
Palpation reveals significant myofascial pain throughout lumbar and gluteal region. ROM of the lumbar spine is severely restricted in all planes.
No sciatic tension signs. Neurologic exam shows signs of a left S1 radiculopathy and diffuse, pain- inhibited weakness in the right lower extremity.
Activity Interference (based on protocol described in Table 18-4): Activity limitation score is 23. Individual is severely limited in sitting, standing, walking, and lifting; he is often unable to travel by car.

Emotional Distress (based on protocol described in Table 18-4): Individual suffers from ongoing depression and experiences acute anxiety during pain flare-ups. Emotional distress score is 6.
Pain Behaviors (based on the rating of global pain behaviors in Table 18-5): Some of the man’s pain behaviors seemed ambiguous and somewhat excessive compared to those of others with similar organ dysfuction. The individual was given a global pain behavior rating of –3.
Credibility: Overall credibility is rated as high, based on reports from the individual’s treating physician that his activity limitations have been very consistent over a number of years and that he has persevered in work efforts despite his severe lumbar spine condition. He is given a global score of +8 for credibility.
Diagnosis: Lumbar postlaminectomy syndrome.
Impairment Rating: (1) Conventional: 20% whole person impairment based on DRE category IV.
(2) Pain related: The total pain-related impairment score is 46, indicating moderately severe pain- related impairment. The impairment is ratable and felt not to be adequately encapsulated in the con- ventional impairment rating given above.
Comment: The individual has significant impair- ment by both the conventional and pain-related impairment rating systems. His pain-related impairment, however, is substantially higher than his conventional impairment. He shows a tempo- ral pattern of pain that is typical among people with chronic back pain. He has ongoing pain that is moderately disabling, with frequent superim- posed flare-ups that are severely disabling.
---END EXAMPLE---

---START EXAMPLE---
Example 18-4

Subject: 42-year-old woman.
History: Eight years ago, individual developed bilat- eral aching forearm pain and numbness of the hands in the context of repetitive wrist/hand motions in her job as an assay technician. Has undergone bilateral carpal tunnel releases, bilat- eral de Quervain’s releases, and bilateral superfi- cial radial neurectomies.
Current Symptoms: Constant burning pain in the dorsal aspect of both forearms and hands, along with aching in the volar aspect of both forearms. This background pain is rated as 6-8/10 in inten- sity. Even mildly forceful use of either hand (eg, pulling on the doorknob of a heavy door) causes pain to increase to 10/10 and can sometimes pro- voke flare-ups that last several days. Based on Table 18-4, the pain intensity score is 19.
Physical Exam: Mild swelling of both hands.
Multiple scars from the surgeries. No definite temperature or color changes. No abnormal sudo- motor activity or trophic changes. ROM of fingers and wrists almost full. Woman recoils with any tactile stimulation of either dorsal forearm or hand. Two-point discrimination is impaired in the distribution of the superficial radial sensory nerve bilaterally. Motor function cannot be tested validly because of severe pain inhibition.

Activity Interference (based on protocol described in Table 18-4): Activities limitation score is 26. Individual is barely able to manage basic ADL, such as dressing herself or maintain- ing personal hygiene. She cannot type for more than 2 minutes and is unable to drive.
Emotional Distress (based on protocol described in Table 18-4): The individual demonstrates severe anxiety and depression in relation to her pain, despite aggressive antidepressant medication therapy. Emotional distress score is 9.
Pain Behavior (using the global pain behavior score in Table 18-5): The woman appeared quite stoic throughout the evaluation. She demonstrated cutaneous hypersensitivity over the dorsal aspect of both forearms and wrists and significant pain- inhibited weakness of distal upper extremity mus- cles. However, strength was excellent in proximal muscles. Overall, the pain behaviors observed were judged to be mildly concordant with her medical condition. Pain behavior score is +1.
Credibility: The woman is felt to be sincerely expressing her suffering. Credibility score is +6.
Diagnosis: Bilateral superficial radial neuropathy.
Impairment Rating: (1) Conventional: 5% impair- ment of the upper extremity due to loss of sensory function in the right superficial radial nerve and 5% impairment of the upper extremity due to loss of sensory function in the left superficial radial nerve. Using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604) yields a total of 10% impairment of the upper extremities, or 6% whole person impairment.
(2) Pain related: Using the procedures described in Tables 18-4 through 18-7, the total pain-related impairment score is 69, indicating severe pain- related impairment. It is felt that the impairment is ratable and not adequately encapsulated in the conventional impairment rating provided above.
Comment: The conventional impairment rating is low because the only measurable loss of function the individual has is in sensation of skin inner- vated by the superficial radial nerve. However, she has neuropathic pain in both upper extremities that causes incapacitating pain. Thus, the pain- related impairment is markedly higher than the conventionally rated impairment.
---END EXAMPLE---

References
1. Merskey H. Association for the Study of Pain, Subcommittee on Taxonomy. Chronic pain syndromes and definitions of pain terms. Pain. 1986(suppl 3):S1.
2. Scarry E. The Body in Pain. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1985.
3. Covington EC. The biological basis of pain. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2000;12:127-146.
4. Deyo RA. The early diagnostic evaluation of patients with low back pain. J Gen Intern Med. 1986;1:328.
5. Jensen MC, Brant-Zawadski MN, Obuchowski N, Modic MT, Malkasian Ross JS. Magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbar spine in people without back pain. N Engl J Med. 1994;331:69-73.
6. Wiesel SW, Stourmas N, Feffer H. A study of computer assisted tomography: I. The incidence of positive CAT scans in an asymptomatic group of patients. Spine. 1984;9:549-551.
7. Woodwell DA. National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 1998 Summary. Advance data from Vital and Health Statistics; No. 315. Hyattsville, Md: National Center for Health Statistics; 2000.
8. Guo HR, Tanaka S, Halperin WE, Cameron LL. Back pain prevalence in US industry and estimates of lost workdays. Am J Public Health. 1999;89:1029-1035.
9. Guo HR, Tanaka S, Cameron LL, et al. Back pain among workers in the United States: national estimates and workers at high risk. Am J Ind Med. 1995;28:591- 602.
10. Dionne CE, Koepsell TD, Von Korff M, Deyo RA, Barlow WE, Checkoway H. Predicting long-term func- tional limitations among back pain patients in primary care settings. J Clin Epidemiol. 1997;50:31-43.
11. Rasmussen BK, Jensen R, Olesen J. Impact of headache on sickness absence and utilisation of medical services: a Danish population study. J Epidemiol Community Health. 1992;46:443-446.
12. Morris DB. Pain and suffering in history. Symposium at: University of California, Los Angeles; 1999; Los Angeles, Calif.
13. US Commission on the Evaluation of Pain, US Dept of Health and Human Services, Social Security Administration Office of Disability. Report of the Commission on the Evaluation of Pain. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office; 1987. Publication 64-031.
14. Pain and disability: clinical, behavioral, and public pol- icy perspectives. In: Osterwsis M, Kleinman A, Mechanic D, eds. Institute of Medicine’s Committee on Pain and Disability and Chronic Illness Behavior. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1987:28.
15. Rickard K. The occurrence of maladaptive health-related behaviors and teacher-rated conduct problems in chil- dren of chronic low back pain patients. J Behav Med. 1988;11:107-116.
16. Okifuji A, Turk DC, Kalauokalani D. Clinical outcome and economic evaluation of multidisciplinary pain cen- ters. In: Block A, Kremer E, Fernandez E, eds. Handbook of Pain Syndromes. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum; 1999:77-98.
17. Fordyce WE. Behavioral Methods for Chronic Pain and Illness. St Louis, Mo: CV Mosby Co; 1976.
18. Gatchel RJ, Turk DC, eds. Psychological Approaches to Pain Management. New York, NY: Guilford Press; 1996.


19. US Commission on the Evaluation of Pain, US Dept of Health and Human Services, Social Security Administration Office of Disability. Appendix C: Summary of the National Study of Chronic Pain Syndrome. In: Report of the Commission on the Evaluation of Pain. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office; 1987.
20. Wilbourn AJ, Porter JM. Thoracic outlet syndromes.
Spine: State of the Art Rev. 1986;2:597-626.
21. California Physician’s Guide to Medical Practice in the California Workers’ Compensation System; 1994.
22. Washington Medical Aid Rules and Fee Schedules;
1999.
23. Jensen MP, Karoly P. Self-report scales and procedures for assessing pain in adults. In: Turk DC, Melzack R, eds. Handbook of Pain Assessment. New York, NY: Guilford Press; 1992:152-168.
24. Melzack R, Katz J. Pain measurement in persons in pain. In: Wall PD, Melzack R, eds. Textbook of Pain. 3rd ed. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 1994.
25. Tait RC, Chibnall JT, Krause S. The Pain Disability Index: psychometric properties. Pain. 1990;40:171-182.
26. Ware JE Jr, Gandek B. Overview of the SF-36 Health Survey and the International Quality of Life Assessment (IQOLA) Project. J Clin Epidemiol. 1998;51:903-912.
27. Fairbank JCT, Couper J, Davies JB, O’Brian JP. The Oswestry low back pain disability questionnaire. Physiotherapy. 1980;66:271-273.
28. Roland M, Morris R. A study of the natural history of back pain. I. Development of a reliable and sensitive measure of disability in low-back pain. Spine. 1983;8:141-144.
29. McDowell I, Newell C. Measuring Health: A Guide to Rating Scales and Questionnaires. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1996.
30. Turk DC, Melzack R, eds. Handbook of Pain Assessment. New York, NY: Guilford Press; 1992.
31. Turk DC, Malzack R, eds. Handbook of Pain Assessment. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Guilford Press; in press.
32. de Bruin AF, de Witte LP, Stevens F, Diederiks JP. Sickness Impact Profile: the state of the art of a generic functional status measure. Soc Sci Med. 1992;35:1003- 1014.
33. Kerns RD, Turk DC, Rudy TE. The West Haven-Yale Multidimensional Pain Inventory (WHYMPI). Pain. 1985;23:345-346.
34. Fernandez E, Turk DC. The scope and significance of anger in the experience of chronic pain. Pain. 1995;61:165-175.
35. Turk DC, Okifuji A, Scharff L. Chronic pain and depres- sion: role of perceived impact and perceived control in different age cohorts. Pain. 1995;61:93-101.
36. Wesley AL, Gatchel RJ, Garofalo JP, Polatin PB. Toward more accurate use of the Beck Depression Inventory with chronic back pain patients. Clin J Pain. 1999;15:117-121.
37. Biggs JT, Wylie LT, Ziegler VE. Validity of the Zung Self-rating Depression Scale. Br J Psychiatry. 1978;132:381-385.
38. Knesevich JW, Biggs JT, Clayton PJ, Ziegler VE. Validity of the Hamilton Rating Scale for depression. Br J Psychiatry. 1977;131:49-52.


39. Norcross JC, Guadagnoli E, Prochaska JO. Factor struc- ture of the Profile of Mood States (POMS): two partial replications. J Clin Psychol. 1984;40:1270-1277.
40. Keefe FJ, Williams DA. Assessment of pain behaviors. In: Turk DC, Melzack R, eds. Handbook of Pain Assessment. New York, NY: Guilford Press; 1992:275- 283.
41. Turk DC, Kerns RD, Rosenberg R. Effects of marital interaction on chronic pain and disability: examining the downside of social support. Rehabil Psychol. 1992;37:357-372.
42. Bigos SJ, Battie MC, Spengler DM, et al. A prospective study of work perceptions and psychosocial factors affecting the report of back injury. Spine. 1991;16:1-6.
43. Krause N, Ragland DR, Fisher JM, Syme SL. Psychosocial job factors, physical workload, and inci- dence of work-related spinal injury: a 5-year prospective study of urban transit operators. Spine. 1998;23:2507- 2516.
44. Papageorgiou AC, Macfarlane GJ, Thomas E, Croft PR, Jayson MI, Silman AJ. Psychosocial factors in the work- place—do they predict new episodes of low back pain? Evidence from the South Manchester Back Pain Study. Spine. 1997;22:1137-1142.
45. van Poppel MNM, Koes BW, Devillé W, Smid T, Bouter LM. Risk factors for back pain incidence in industry: a prospective study. Pain. 1998; 77:81-86.
46. Valat JP, Goupille P, Vedere V. Low back pain: risk fac- tors for chronicity. Rev Rhum Engl Ed. 1997;64:189- 194.
47. Williams RA, Pruitt SD, Doctor JN, et al. The contribu- tion of job satisfaction to the transition from acute to chronic low back pain. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1998;79:366-374.
48. Gatchel RJ, Polatin PB, Mayer TG. The dominant role of psychosocial risk factors in the development of chronic low back pain disability. Spine. 1995;20:2702- 2709.
49. Hasenbring M, Marienfeld G, Kuhlendahl D, Soyka D. Risk factors of chronicity in lumbar disc patients. A prospective investigation of biologic, psychologic, and social predictors of therapy outcome. Spine. 1994;19:2759-2765.
50. Greenough CG, Taylor LJ, Fraser RD. Anterior lumbar fusion. A comparison of noncompensation patients with compensation patients. Clin Orthop. 1994;300:30-37.
51. Penta M, Fraser RD. Anterior lumbar interbody fusion. A minimum 10-year follow-up. Spine. 1997;22:2429- 2434.
52.
Scheman J, Covington EC, Blosser T, Green K. Effects of instructions on physical capacities outcome in a workers’ compensation setting. Pain Med. 2000;1:in press.
53. Greenough CG, Fraser RD. The effects of compensation on recovery from low-back injury. Spine. 1989;14:947- 955.
54. Rainville J, Sobel JB, Hartigan C, Wright A. The effect of compensation involvement on the reporting of pain and disability by patients referred for rehabilitation of chronic low back pain. Spine. 1997;22:2016-2024.
55. Shechtman O. Using the coefficient of variation to detect sincerity of effort of grip strength: a literature review. J Hand Ther. 2000;13:25-32.
56. Lechner DE, Bradbury SF, Bradley LA. Detecting sin- cerity of effort: a summary of methods and approaches. Phys Ther. 1998;78:867-888.
57. Hildreth DH, Breidenbach WC, Lister GD, Hodges AD. Detection of submaximal effort by use of the rapid exchange grip. J Hand Surg. 1989;14A:742-745.
58. Waddell G, McCulloch J, Kummel E, Venner RM. Non- organic physical signs in low-back pain. Spine. 1980;5:117-125.
59. Gaines WG Jr, Hegmann KT. Effectiveness of Waddell’s nonorganic signs in predicting a delayed return to regu- lar work in patients experiencing acute occupational low back pain. Spine. 1999;24:396-400.
60. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 4th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; 1994.
61. Schweiger A, Parducci A. Nocebo: the psychologic induction of pain. Pavlovian J Biol Sci. 1981;16:140- 143.
62. Fishbain DA, Cutler R, Rosomoff HL, Rosomoff RS. Chronic pain disability exaggeration/malingering and submaximal effort research. Clin J Pain. 1999;15:244- 274.
63. Bytzer P, Stokholm M, Andersen I, et al. Prevalence of surreptitious laxative abuse in patients with diarrhea of uncertain origin: a cost benefit analysis of a screening procedure. Gut. 1989;30:1379-1384.
64. Rickards FW, De Vidi S. Exaggerated hearing loss in noise induced hearing loss compensation claims in Victoria. Med J Aust. 1995;163:360-363.
65. Weintraub MI. Chronic pain in litigation: what is the relationship? Neurol Clin. 1995;13: 341-349.


Appendix

Recording Range-of-Motion Measurements


Range-of-motion (ROM) measurements are used in the spine, upper extremities, and lower extremities to identify dysfunction in movement that may result in changes in function in the body part. Physicians have questioned the reproducibility of ROM measure- ments, as well as their ability to predict aspects of function.1 Reproducibility may be improved with the use of standardized measurement techniques, proper equipment, trained evaluators, adequate designated warm-up exercises, and uniform recording.1,2 The purpose of this appendix is to provide further infor- mation on factors that can affect reproducibility to lead to greater standardization in technique.


Measurement Devices
The Guides refers to the use of goniometers or incli- nomers to measure joint motion. Except in the spine, in which the inclinometer is the device of choice, either the inclinometer or the goniometer can be used to reliably measure joint motion, depending on the preference and experience of the examiner. A two- arm goniometer depends on visual assessment of both the stationary and the moving arm. An incli- nometer measures gravity and enables the starting position to be consistently recorded with respect to gravity. Some researchers and clinicians believe the inclinometer is easier to use and more accurate, although limited data exist supporting this opinion.3 Other electronic devices may also yield accurate measurements. Limited data exist concerning how measurements from newer devices compare to the more commonly used goniometers and inclinome- ters. Before using another measurement device, the evaluator should assess its reproducibility and accu- racy compared to established tools and methods.

Measurement Techniques
To increase accuracy, identify anatomic landmarks, properly position and stabilize the body, and use a consistent technique as outlined in the Guides to apply the measuring device to the joint. Anatomic landmarks are listed in the Guides. It is recom- mended that the evaluator mark these areas with tape or a marking pencil to ensure the same starting posi- tion for repeated measurements. The evaluator should also record the landmarks used in the impair- ment report; differences in the site of the landmark could result in different findings among examiners.

Prior to obtaining measurements, have the individual perform appropriate warm-up exercises to obtain an accurate assessment of current ability. Include repeti- tions of extension, flexion, lateral bending, and rota- tion as listed in the relevant chapters.

Properly position and stabilize the area, taking into account the individual’s impairment, level of com- fort, and known biomechanical characteristics of the joint.1 Most optimal positions for measurement are noted in the Guides. Obtain proper body alignment and stabilization of the device before recording measurements. Active movements are recommended since they may be more consistent than passive movements, less of a risk to individual injury, and a better approximation of the individual’s function.


593


Figure A-1a Neutral (0°) Starting Positions for ROM Measurements—Frontal Plane

Figure A-1b Neutral (0°) Starting Positions for ROM Measurements——Sagittal Plane


0?
0?


0?


0?

0?


0?


0?

0?


0?


0?


0?	0?
0?	0?

0?
0?
0?


Recording Systems
Differences in recording systems for ROM measure- ments can contribute to additional errors in interpre- tation. Ideally, the examiner records the starting point and measurements in reference to the starting point. Subsequent motions are recorded in a repro- ducible and succinct manner.

ROM measurements can be recorded with text descriptions or with the use of a numeric format. A numeric format has been adopted by some states and a few countries in Europe to facilitate an efficient and uniform way of recording and retrieving data.
This numeric format is known as the SFTR method of recording joint motion. The SFTR method allows recording of motion with only one letter and a maxi- mum of three numbers. This numeric format is brief and complete, minimizes errors in transcription or understanding, and facilitates communication with the universal language of numbers. The SFTR format also enables easy translation of data from reports to computerized formats and displays.

Several requirements need to be met to use and record measurements according to the SFTR method.

1. All joint measurements are measured from a defined, neutral 0° starting position, as shown in Figure A-1a. This neutral starting position is the generally accepted anatomic position, with the body upright and the upper extremities extended at the side of the body with palms facing anteri- orly. If the individual is sitting, supine, or prone, the starting position relates to the upright anatomic position. The starting position for rota- tion is midway between external and internal rotation or supination and pronation.
2. All joint motion is recorded in three basic planes: sagittal (S), frontal (F), and transverse (T). Rotation (R) crosses multiple planes and receives a separate recording. The planes are depicted in Figure 15-7.
a. The sagittal (S) plane divides the body into right and left halves. (S) motions include extension and flexion.


b. The frontal (F) plane divides the body into anterior and posterior parts (front and back).
(F) motions include abduction, adduction, ele- vation, depression, radial and ulnar deviation, and lateral bending of the spine to the left
and right.
c. The transverse (T) plane divides the body into upper and lower halves. (T) motions include horizontal shoulder extension and flexion, hip horizontal abduction and adduction (hip flexed at 90°), shoulder retraction and protraction, and hallux valgus.
d. Rotation (R) can occur in any of the planes, depending on the limb positions. (R) motions include external and internal rotation, supina- tion and pronation, and spine rotation to the left and right.
3. Record all motions with three numbers in a spe- cific sequence. Record movements to the left or away from the middle of the body first: extension, abduction, external rotation, supination, valgus, eversion, lateral bending, or rotation of the spine to the left. Then record the reference (starting) posi- tion, which is normally 0°, in the middle. Record movements toward the middle of the body after the reference 0° (on the right side of 0°): flexion, adduction, internal rotation, pronation, varus, inversion, lateral bending, or rotation of the spine to the right.
4.
Record all positions of ankylosis with two num- bers, indicating the degree of ankylosis and the ref- erence or starting position of 0°. For example, wrist ankylosis in 20° of extension is recorded as: wrist (S): 20-0 and in 20° of flexion as wrist (S) 0-20.
5. When the neutral 0° position cannot be reached due to limited or restricted motion, the middle number will not be 0 but will be the actual start- ing position. For example, an elbow flexed at 30° (extension lag of 30°), with further flexion to 90°, is recorded as S: 0-30-90.

Tables A-1, A-2, and A-3 describe a method to record ROM measurements for the upper extremties, lower extremities, and spine, using a standard text description and a numeric recording system, the SFTR method.


* Normal ranges are in parentheses.


* Normal ranges are in parentheses.

† A non-0° starting position is noted in the ankylosis table.


* Normal ranges are in parentheses.

References
1. Lea RD, Gerhardt JJ. Current concepts review range of motion measurement. Bone Joint Surg. 1995;77:784- 798.
2. Mayer T, Kondraske G, Beals S, Gatchel R. Spinal range of motion: accuracy and sources of error with inclino- metric measurement. Spine. 1997;22:1976-1984.
3. Gerhardt JJ. Documentation of Joint Motion. Rev 3rd ed. Portland, Ore: Oregon Medical Association; 1992.

Glossary


Abnormal illness behavior	Behavior that suggests amplification of symptoms for any of a variety of psychological or social reasons or purposes.

Acquired	Developed after birth. Not hereditary or congenital.

Activities of daily living (ADL)	Activities of daily living include those listed in Table 1-2, repro- duced below.


Table 1-2 Activities of Daily Living Commonly Measured in Activities of Daily Living (ADL) and Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL) Scales

---START EXAMPLE---
Example
Urinating, defecating, brushing combing hair, bathing, dressing oneself, eating
Writing, typing, seeing, hearing, speaking
Standing, sitting, reclining, walking, climbing stairs
Hearing, seeing, tactile feeling, tasting, smelling
Grasping, lifting, tactile discrimination
Riding, driving, flying
Orgasm, ejaculation, lubrication, erection
Restful, nocturnal sleep pattern

ADL	See Activities of daily living (ADL).

Aggravation	A factor(s) (eg, physical, chemical, biological, or medical condition) that adversely alters the course or progression of the medical impairment. Worsening of a preexisting medical condition or impairment.

Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)	A civil rights law, signed in 1990, that protects individu- als with disabilities against discrimination in such diverse areas as employment, government service entitlement, and access to public accommodations.

Ankylosis	Fixation of a joint in a specific position by disease, injury, or surgery. When surgically created, the aim is to fuse the joint in that posi- tion, which is best for improved function.

Apportionment	A distribution or allocation of causation among multiple factors that caused or significantly contributed to the injury or disease and existing impairment.

Assistive devices	Devices that help individuals with a functional loss increase function. Examples include reachers, extended grabbers, hearing aids, and telephone amplifiers.

Blindness	The absence of vision (no light percep- tion, NLP).

Causalgia	See Complex regional pain syndromes.


599


Causation	An identifiable factor (eg, accident or exposure to hazards or disease) that results in a medically identifiable condition.

Chronic pain	Pain that extends beyond the expected period of healing or is related to a pro- gressive disease. It is usually elicited by an injury or disease but may be perpetuated by factors that are both pathogenically and physically remote from the original cause. Because the pain persists, it is likely that environmental and psychological factors interact with the tissue damage, contribut- ing to the persistence of pain and illness behavior.

Combined Values Chart	A method used to com- bine multiple impairments, derived from the for- mula A + B(1–A) = combined values of A and B, which ensures that the summary value will not exceed 100% of the whole person.

Complex regional pain syndromes (CRPS) CRPS I	Reflex sympathetic dystrophy
CRPS II Causalgia. Described in Sections 13.8, 16.5e, and 17.2m. Burning pain associ- ated with signs of vasomotor and sudo- motor dysfunction and later trophic changes of all tissues from skin to bone. Causalgia follows a lesion of a peripheral nerve, while RSD may fol- low a sprain, fracture, or nerve or vas- cular injury.

Congenital condition	Exists at or dates from birth and may be acquired during development in the uterus. A congenital condition is not hereditary.

Contracture	A permanent shortening (as of mus- cle, tendon, or scar tissue) producing loss of motion, deformity, or distortion.

Contrast sensitivity	The ability to perceive larger objects with low contrast. This ability is important for ADL tasks such as face recognition (see Section 12.4b).

Creatinine clearance	A quantitative measure of the degree of functional impairment of the upper urinary tract.

Cure	Complete recovery from a disease or condition.

Dermatitis	An inflammation of the skin.

Desirable weight	A range of optimal weight given an individual’s sex, age, height, and body habitus.

Deterioration or Decompensation	An individual’s repeated failure to adapt to stressful circum- stances.

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV) Published by the American Psychiatric Association, this book lists and describes the criteria necessary to meet a psychiatric diagnosis.

Diffusing capacity	Measurement of gas transfer from the lung tissue into the blood.

Disability	Alteration of an individual’s capacity to meet personal, social, or occupational demands or statutory or regulatory requirements because of an impairment. Disability is a relational outcome, contingent on the environmental conditions in which activities are performed.

Disfigurement	An altered or abnormal appearance of color, shape, or structure of the skin or of a body part. Disfigurement may be caused by an injury or illness and may persist after the underly- ing condition has resolved. Disfigurement may cause social rejection, impairment of self-image, alteration of lifestyle, or other adverse mental and behavioral effects.

Dizziness	A sensation of unsteadiness accompa- nied by a feeling of movement of the individual.

Dominant extremity	One of a pair of bodily struc- tures that is the more effective or predominant in action.

Dysesthesia	Impairment of sensitivity, especially to touch.

Effects of medication	Medication may impact the individual’s signs, symptoms, and ability to func- tion. The physician may choose to increase the impairment estimate by a small percentage (1% to 3%) to account for effects of treatment.

Functional Acuity Score (FAS), Functional Field Score (FFS)	These scores combine the VAS and VFS values from OD, OS, and OU to derive an estimate of the ability to perform generic activi- ties of daily living (see Tables 12-3 and 12-6).
Higher values indicate better vision.


Functional limitations	The inability to completely perform a task due to an impairment. In some instances, functional limitations may be overcome through modifications in the individual’s personal or environmental accommodations.

Functional Vision Score (FVS)	The functional vision score combines the Functional Acuity Score and the Functional Field Score (see Table 12-1) with individual adjustments if needed (see Section 12.4b). Higher values indicate better vision.

Handicap	A historical term used to describe dis- ability or a person living with a disability or dis- abilities. A handicapped individual has been considered to be someone with a physical or men- tal disability that substantially limits activity, especially in relation to employment or education.

Hernia	A protrusion of an organ or body part through connective tissue or through a wall of the cavity in which it is normally enclosed.

HIV	See Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).

Hormone	A product of living cells that circulates in body fluids and produces a specific effect on the activity of cells remote from its point of origin.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)	Any of a group of retroviruses, and especially HIV-1, that infect and destroy helper T cells of the immune system, causing the marked reduction in their numbers that is one of the diagnostic criteria of AIDS. Also called AIDS virus.

Impairment	A loss, loss of use, or derangement of any body part, organ system, or organ function.

Impairment evaluation	A medical evaluation per- formed by a physician, using a standard method as outlined in the Guides, to determine permanent impairment associated with a medical condition.

Impairment percentages or ratings	Consensus- derived estimates that reflect the severity of the impairment and the degree to which the impair- ment decreases an individual’s ability to perform common activities of daily living as listed in Table 1-2.

Independent medical evaluation (IME)	An eval- uation performed by an independent medical examiner, who evaluates—but does not provide care for—the individual.

Inherited condition	A condition received from a parent or ancestor by genetic transmission.

Legal blindness	A term used to indicate eligibility for certain benefits. It is a misnomer, since 90% of “legally blind” individuals are not blind. The pre- ferred term, as used in ICD-9-CM, is severe vision loss (see Section 12.2b.1).

The definition of legal blindness varies slightly in different statutes. A common definition is “visual acuity of 20/200 or less.” Implementation of this definition depends on the chart used (see Section 12.2b.1). An alternative definition is “visual field loss to a 20° diameter or less.” This definition does not address nonconcentric field losses.

Malingering	A conscious and willful feigning or exaggeration of a disease or effect of an injury in order to obtain specific external gain. It is usually motivated by external incentives, such as receiv- ing financial compensation, obtaining drugs, or avoiding work or other responsibilities.

Maximal medical improvement (MMI)	A condi- tion or state that is well stabilized and unlikely to change substantially in the next year, with or without medical treatment. Over time, there may be some change; however, further recovery or deterioration is not anticipated.

Menopause	The period of natural cessation of menstruation, usually occurring between the ages of 45 and 55.

METS	Multiples of resting metabolic energy used for any given activity. Each MET represents 3.5 cc of oxygen consumption per kilogram per minute. One MET equals oxygen uptake at rest. The results of stress testing are expressed in METs.

Motivation	A need or desire that causes a person to act.

Neutral zero measuring method	An approach used by the Guides to measure range of motion that defines the neutral or starting position of ref- erence for any joint being measured as the stand- ing anatomic position. The neutral or anatomic position is recorded as the 0° position.

Normal	A range or zone that represents healthy functioning and varies with age, gender, and other factors, such as environmental conditions.


Occupational history	A tool used in a comprehen- sive clinical assessment to obtain, organize, and assess information about the current and prior workplace environments and exposures and their relationship to illness and injury. An occupational history can provide essential information to improve treatment, prevent further or additional illness or injury, and assist in the determination of whether work directly caused or contributed to the development of the injury or illness.

Pain	An unpleasant sensory and emotional experi- ence associated with actual or potential tissue damage or described in terms of such damage.

Pain behavior	Verbal or nonverbal actions under- stood by observers to indicate that a person may be experiencing pain, distress, and suffering.
These actions may include audible complaints, facial expressions, abnormal postures or gait, use of prosthetic devices, or avoidance of activities.

Paresthesias	A sensation of pricking, tingling, or creeping on the skin, usually associated with injury or irritation of a sensory nerve or nerve root.

Patch test	Patch tests are used to diagnose allergic contact sensitivity. Small patches containing non- irritating concentrations of the allergens to be tested are applied to unbroken skin, usually on the upper back, for 48 hours. A positive test reaction occurs when dermatitis develops at the site of application 48 to 168 hours later.

Permanent impairment	An impairment that has reached maximal medical improvement.

Prosthesis	An artificial device to replace a missing part of the body.

Psychogenic pain	Severe and prolonged pain that is inconsistent with neuroanatomic distribution of pain receptors or without, or grossly in excess of, detectable organic or pathophysiologic mecha- nisms. As a result, the report of pain is attributed primarily to psychological factors.

Pulmonary function tests	Studies of lung function including such measurements as lung volumes, inspiratory and expiratory flow rates, and effi- ciency of gas transfer.

Radiculopathy	Any pathological condition of the nerve roots.

Raynaud’s phenomenon	A vascular disorder marked by recurrent spasm of the capillaries, especially those of the fingers and toes upon exposure to cold, that is characterized by pallor, cyanosis, and redness in succession and usually accompanied by pain.

Recurrence	A return of the disorder or disease after a remission.

Reflex sympathetic dystrophy	See Complex regional pain syndromes.

Reliability	See Reproducibility.

Remission	Improvement or a state or period during which the symptoms of a disease are abated.

Replacement medication or therapy	Treatment that involves the supply of something (an element, compound, or hormone) lacking or lost to the body’s system. Although the person may be fully functional on an everyday basis while taking replacement medication, he or she may be unable to respond properly to stresses such as fever, trauma, or infection. This impaired ability to respond to stress needs careful consideration.

Reproducibility	Synonymous with reliability.
Consistency in results when examinations (tests) are repeated.

Sciatica	Pain along the course of a sciatic nerve, especially in the back of the thigh, caused by com- pression, inflammation, or reflex mechanisms.

Sensitivity	The extent to which individuals with a condition are correctly classified.

SFTR documentation system	A numeric method for recording range-of-motion measurements taken by the neutral zero method.

Social functioning	An individual’s ability to inter- act appropriately and communicate effectively with other individuals.

Somatoform pain disorder	According to DSM-IV, this is preoccupation with pain in the absence of physical findings that adequately account for the pain and its intensity, as well as the presence of psychological factors that are judged to have a major role in the onset, severity, exacerbation, and maintenance of pain.


Specificity	The extent to which individuals without a condition are correctly classified.

Spirometry	Measurement by means of a spirome- ter of the forced vital capacity and its subdivi- sions, as well as measurement of the speed of airflow achieved in performance of this maneuver.

Stress testing	An electrocardiographic test of heart function before, during, and after a controlled period of increasingly strenuous exercise (as on a treadmill).

Surgically created stoma	An artificial permanent opening, especially in the abdominal wall, created to compensate for anatomic losses and allow either ingress to or egress from the alimentary tract.

Teleroentgenography	A radiographic method used to determine actual limb length.

Tinnitus	A sensation of noise (such as ringing or roaring) in the ear. Tinnitus may be audible or inaudible. Audible tinnitus is usually associated with a muscular tic or vascular bruit. Inaudible tinnitus can be heard only by the person affected and may be associated with an obstruction of the external auditory canal or a disturbance of the auditory nerve and/or the central nervous system.

Treatment	The action or manner of treating an individual, medically or surgically. Medical treat- ment is the action or manner of treating an indi- vidual, medically or surgically by a physician.
Treatment may include modalities recommended by a health care provider.

Validity An accurate measurement apart from ran- dom errors. Validity refers to the extent to which a test measures what it is intended to measure.

Vertigo	A sensation of motion (eg, spinning) when there is no motion or an exaggerated sense of motion in response to a given bodily movement.

Vision (low)	A term applied to the large group of individuals who are not blind (hence low vision), but who do not have normal vision either (hence low vision) (see Section 12.2b.2). In ICD-9-CM, low vision is defined as visual acuity loss to less than 20/63 (20/60 if rounded) down to 20/1000 (1/50).

Vision loss (ranges of)	Table 12-2 lists more detailed ranges of visual acuity loss as defined in ICD-9-CM.
Range of normal vision	20/25 or better
Mild vision loss	Less than 20/25 (near-normal vision)
Moderate vision loss	Less than 20/63 (20/60)
Severe vision loss	Less than 20/160 (20/200 or less)
Profound vision loss	Less than 20/400
Near-blindness	Less than 20/1000
Total blindness	No light perception (NLP)

Table 12-5 defines similar ranges of visual field loss.

Visual acuity	The ability to recognize small objects with high contrast, such as letters on a let- ter chart (see Section 12.2). This ability is impor- tant for ADL tasks such as reading.

Visual Acuity Score (VAS), Visual Field Score (VFS)	Scales used to assign a numeric value to visual acuity and visual field measurements for each eye (see Tables 12-2 and 12-5). They are used for calculation purposes. Higher values indi- cate better vision.

Visual field	The ability to detect objects in the periphery of the visual environment (see Section 12.3). This ability is important for ADL tasks such as orientation and mobility.

Visual impairment rating	A rating calculated as 100 – FVS. Higher values indicate poorer vision.

VO Oxygen consumption or uptake, measured in mL/min.

Whole person impairment	Percentages that esti- mate the impact of the impairment on the individ- ual’s overall ability to perform activities of daily living, excluding work.

Workers’ compensation	A compensation program designed to provide medical and economic sup- port to workers who have been injured or become ill from an incident arising out of and in the course of their employment.


Combined Values Chart


1  2
2  3  4
3  4  5  6
4  5  6  7  8
5  6  7  8  9 10
6  7  8  9 10 11
7  8  9 10 11 12
8  9 10 11 12 13
9 10 11 12 13 14
10 11 12 13 14 15
11 12 13 14 15 15
12 13 14 15 16 16
13 14 15 16 16 17
14 15 16 17 17 18
15 16 17 18 18 19
16 17 18 19 19 20
17 18 19 19 20 21
18 19 20 20 21 22
19 20 21 21 22 23
20 21 22 22 23 24
21 22 23 23 24 25


12
13 14
14 14 15
14 15 16 17
15 16 17 18 19
16 17 18 19 20
17 18 19 20 21
18 19 20 21 22
19 20 21 22 23
20 21 22 23 24
21 22 23 24 24
22 23 24 24 25
23 24 25 25 26
24 25 25 26 27
25 26 26 27 28
26 27 27 28 29


21
22 23
23 23 24
23 24 25 26
24 25 26 27 28
25 26 27 28 29
26 27 28 29 29
27 28 29 29 30
28 29 30 30 31
29 30 30 31 32
30 30 31 32 33


29
30 31
31 32 33
32 33 34 34
33 34 34 35 36
34 34 35 36 37 38


The values are derived from the formula A + B(1–A) = combined value of A and B, where A and B are the decimal equivalents of the impairment ratings. In the chart all values are expressed as percents. To combine any two impairment values, locate the larger of the values on the side of the chart and read along that row until you come to the column indicated by the smaller value at the bottom of the chart. At the intersection of the row and the column is the combined value.
For example, to combine 35% and 20%, read down the side of the chart until you come to the larger value, 35%. Then read across the 35% row until you come to the column indicated by 20% at the bottom of the chart. At the intersection of the row and column is the number 48. Therefore, 35% combined with 20% is 48%. Because of the construction of this chart, the larger impairment value must be identified at the side of the chart.
If three or more impairment values are to be combined, select any two and find their combined value as above. Then use that value and the third value to locate the combined value of all. This process can be repeated indefinitely, the final value in each instance being the combination of all the previous values. In each step of this process the larger impairment value must be identified at the side of the chart.
Note: If impairments from two or more organ systems are to be combined to express a whole person impairment, each must first be expressed as a whole person impairment percent.

22 23 24 24 25 26
23 24 25 25 26 27
24 25 26 26 27 28
25 26 27 27 28 29
26 27 27 28 29 30
27 28 28 29 30 31
28 29 29 30 31 32
29 30 30 31 32 33
30 31 31 32 33 34
31 32 32 33 34 34
32 33 33 34 35 35
33 34 34 35 36 36
34 35 35 36 37 37
35 36 36 37 38 38
36 37 37 38 39 39
37 38 38 39 40 40
38 39 39 40 40 41
39 40 40 41 41 42
40 41 41 42 42 43
41 42 42 43 43 44
42 43 43 44 44 45
43 44 44 45 45 46
44 45 45 46 46 47
45 46 46 47 47 48
46 47 47 48 48 49
47 48 48 49 49 50
48 49 49 50 50 51
49 50 50 51 51 52
50 51 51 52 52 53
1  2  3  4	5

27 27 28 29 30
28 28 29 30 31
29 29 30 31 32
30 30 31 32 33
30 31 32 33 33
31 32 33 34 34
32 33 34 34 35
33 34 35 35 36
34 35 36 36 37
35 36 37 37 38
36 37 37 38 39
37 38 38 39 40
38 39 39 40 41
39 40 40 41 42
40 40 41 42 42
41 41 42 43 43
42 42 43 44 44
43 43 44 44 45
44 44 45 45 46
45 45 46 46 47
45 46 47 47 48
46 47 48 48 49
47 48 48 49 50
48 49 49 50 51
49 50 50 51 51
50 51 51 52 52
51 52 52 53 53
52 53 53 54 54
53 54 54 55 55
6  7  8  9 10

31 31 32 33 34
31 32 33 34 35
32 33 34 35 35
33 34 35 36 36
34 35 36 36 37
35 36 36 37 38
36 37 37 38 39
37 38 38 39 40
38 38 39 40 41
39 39 40 41 41
39 40 41 42 42
40 41 42 42 43
41 42 43 43 44
42 43 43 44 45
43 44 44 45 46
44 45 45 46 46
45 45 46 47 47
46 46 47 48 48
47 47 48 48 49
47 48 49 49 50
48 49 50 50 51
49 50 50 51 52
50 51 51 52 52
51 52 52 53 53
52 52 53 54 54
53 53 54 54 55
54 54 55 55 56
55 55 56 56 57
56 56 57 57 58
11 12 13 14 15

34 35 36 37 38
35 36 37 38 38
36 37 38 38 39
37 38 39 39 40
38 39 39 40 41
39 39 40 41 42
40 40 41 42 42
40 41 42 42 43
41 42 43 43 44
42 43 43 44 45
43 44 44 45 46
44 44 45 46 46
45 45 46 47 47
45 46 47 47 48
46 47 48 48 49
47 48 48 49 50
48 49 49 50 50
49 49 50 51 51
50 50 51 51 52
50 51 52 52 53
51 52 52 53 54
52 53 53 54 54
53 54 54 55 55
54 54 55 55 56
55 55 56 56 57
55 56 57 57 58
56 57 57 58 58
57 58 58 59 59
58 59 59 60 60
16 17 18 19 20

38 39
39 40 41
40 41 41 42
41 42 42 43 44
42 42 43 44 45
42 43 44 45 45
43 44 45 45 46
44 45 45 46 47
45 45 46 47 48
45 46 47 48 48
46 47 48 48 49
47 48 48 49 50
48 49 49 50 51
49 49 50 51 51
49 50 51 51 52
50 51 51 52 53
51 52 52 53 54
52 52 53 54 54
53 53 54 54 55
53 54 55 55 56
54 55 55 56 57
55 56 56 57 57
56 56 57 57 58
57 57 58 58 59
57 58 58 59 60
58 59 59 60 60
59 59 60 60 61
60 60 61 61 62
61 61 62 62 63
21 22 23 24 25


45
46 47
47 47 48
47 48 49 50
48 49 50 50 51
49 50 50 51 52
50 50 51 52 52
50 51 52 52 53
51 52 52 53 54
52 53 53 54 55
53 53 54 55 55
53 54 55 55 56
54 55 55 56 57
55 55 56 57 57
56 56 57 57 58
56 57 58 58 59
57 58 58 59 59
58 58 59 60 60
59 59 60 60 61
59 60 60 61 62
60 61 61 62 62
61 61 62 62 63
62 62 63 63 64
62 63 63 64 64
63 64 64 65 65
26 27 28 29 30


52
53 54
54 54 55
54 55 56 56
55 56 56 57 58
56 56 57 58 58
57 57 58 58 59
57 58 58 59 60
58 59 59 60 60
59 59 60 60 61
59 60 60 61 62
60 61 61 62 62
61 61 62 62 63
61 62 62 63 64
62 63 63 64 64
63 63 64 64 65
63 64 64 65 66
64 65 65 66 66
65 65 66 66 67
66 66 67 67 68
31 32 33 34 35


59
60 60
60 61 62
61 62 62 63
62 62 63 63 64
62 63 63 64 65
63 63 64 65 65
64 64 65 65 66
64 65 65 66 66
65 65 66 66 67
65 66 67 67 68
66 67 67 68 68
67 67 68 68 69
67 68 68 69 69
68 69 69 70 70
36 37 38 39 40


65
66 66
66 67 68
67 68 68 69
68 68 69 69 70
68 69 69 70 70
69 69 70 70 71
69 70 70 71 71
70 70 71 71 72
71 71 72 72 73
41 42 43 44 45


71
71 72
72 72 73
72 73 73 74
73 74 74 75 75
46 47 48 49 50


Index


A
Abdominal wall hernias, 136–137 Abducens nerve, 330
Abnormal illness behavior, 567, 599
Achalasia (example), 125
Acne conglobata (example), 184 Acquired (glossary term), 599 Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(example), 202
Acromegaly (example), 215–216 Active radial deviation, elbow/wrist,
501
Activities of daily living (ADL) glossary term, 599 mental/behavior disorders and, 361 scales of, 5–7
Activity limitations, 8. see also
Disability
ADA. see American with Disabilities Act (ADA)
Adams-Stokes attacks (example), 58 Addison’s disease (example), 224–225 ADL. see Activities of daily living
(ADL)
Adrenal cortex, 222–228
Adrenal medulla, 228–230
Aggravation, 12, 599
Alcoholism, hepatitis (example), 134 Alzheimer’s disease (example),
320–321
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 14, 599

Amputations
conditions associated with, 444–445 digital levels, 442–444
levels proximal to digits, 441–442 lower extremities, 545
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, example), 335
Anal disease, 131–132
Anal fistula (examples), 131
Anal incontinence (example), 132 Anatomic loss, 4
Anemia, 192–196
urinary tract impairment (example), 149
Aneurysm (example), 40
Angina pectoris (examples), 39–41 Ankle, 541–542
Ankylosis, 402
ankle, 541–542
foot, 542–543
glossary term, 599
hip, 538–539
knee, 540–541
  in lumbar spine, 409–410 Anorectal system, neurologic impair-
ments, 342
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 212, 213
Aortic diseases, 70–72
Aortic regurgitation (example), 32, 34
Aortic stenosis (example), 31, 32, 34 Aortic valve replacement (example), 33 Apportionment Analysis, 11–12 Apportionment (glossary term), 599 Arousal disorders, 317–319
Arrhythmias, 56–59
Arteries, 73–77
Arthritis, 544–545
psoriatic (example), 185

Arthroplasty, 505–506
Aphasia, 322–325
Assistive devices (glossary term), 599 Asthma, 102–104
chest roentgenograms, 92
  example, 109, 110–111 Asymmetry of spinal motion, 382 Atrial arrhythmias (example), 57 Atrial septal defect (example), 43 Atrophy, 382
Autonomic function assessment, 308 Autonomic nervous system (ANS), 351


B
Basal cell carcinoma (BCC), 177, 184
Behavioral impairments, 325–327 Biliary cirrhosis (examples), 135 Biliary tract, 135
Binocular acuity, 282
Bladder, 151–153
neurogenic impairment (example), 152
Blindness (glossary term), 599 Bone deformities, 499–505
Brachial plexus, 346–347
  impairment determination, 489–491 Brainstem infarct (example), 319 Bronchitis, chronic, 89
Budd-Chiari syndrome (example), 196 Burns
scars (example), 179, 180, 183, 185,
186
zirconium chloride (example), 182


607

C
Cancer
lung, 90, 106
skin, 177
Carbon dioxide, diffusing capacity, 95–100
Carcinomas
basal cell, 177, 184
  squamous cell, 177 Cardiac diseases
arrhythmias, 56–59
asymptomatic coronary, 34
cardiomyopathies, 47–51
congenital, 42–46
coronary, 35–41
functional classification table, 26 hypertensive, 66–69
pericardial, 52–55
valvular, 29–34
Cardiomyopathies, 47–51 Cardiovascular system
left ventricular function (coronary disease), 28
  peripheral vascular disease, 73–77 Carotid duplex examination, 307 Carpal instability, 502–503
Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS), 495, 587
Cauda equina syndrome, 383 Causalgia, 343. see also Complex
regional pain syndrome (CRPS)
lower extremities, 553
Causalgia (CRPS II), 495–497, 600
Causation, 11, 600
CD4 cells, 198–199
Central nervous system, 306–311 Cerebral hemorrhage (example), 311 Cervical spine, range-of-motion
method, 417–422
Cervix, 165–167
Chest roentgenography, 92
Cholangitis (example), 130
Chronic bronchitis, 89
example, 108, 109
smoking and, 90
Chronic pain, 566, 600. see also Pain Chronic pain syndrome (CPS),
567–568
Cigarette smoking. see Tobacco Clubbing, 91
CMC (carpometacarpal) joint. see
       Thumb Cobb method, 90
Cognitive impairment, evaluating, 319–322
Colitis, ulcerative (example), 129, 130

Colonic diseases (examples), 128–131 Combined Values Chart (glossary
term), 600
Combined Values Chart, 9–10 Communication impairments, 322–325 Complex regional pain syndrome
(CRPS), 343, 495–497, 600
lower extremities, 553
Compression neuropathy, 491–494
Computed tomography (CT), 92, 307 Congenital condition (glossary term),
600
Congenital heart disease, 42–46 Constrictive tenosynovitis, 506–507
Contact dermatitis, 176–177, 183
  (example), 178, 179, 180 Contracture (glossary term), 600 Contrast sensitivity, 280, 600
Convulsive epilepsy, 315 Coronary heart disease, 35–41 Cough, 89
Cranial nerves, 327–335
Creatinine clearance (glossary term), 600
Crohn’s disease (example), 122, 129 CRPS. see Complex regional pain syn-
drome (CRPS)
CRPS II. see Causalgia (CRPS II) CT myelogram, 307
Cure (glossary term), 600 Cushing’s syndrome, 223
example, 226–228
Cyanosis, 91
Cystitis (example), 151
Cystometrograms, 383


D
Decompensation (glossary term), 600 Deglutition, 262
Dementia (example), 310–311 Dermatitis
atopic, 181
contact, 176–177
glossary term, 600
of vulva (example), 163
Desirable weight (glossary term), 600 Deterioration (glossary term), 600 Diabetes insipidus (example), 215 Diabetes mellitus, 230
criteria for rating, 231 examples, 225, 232–235
Diagnosis-related estimates (DRE) cervical spine, 392–395
lumbar spine, 384–388
spine, 381–384
thoracic spine, 388–391

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV), 600
Diastolic dysfunction, 28
Diffusing capacity (glossary term), 600 Digestive system
assessment principles, 117–120 upper digestive tract, 120–127
DIP (distal interphalangeal) joint. see
       Fingers Disability
ADA definition of, 14–15 defined, 8
glossary term, 600 impairment percentages and, 9
Disfigurement (glossary term), 600 Diverticulosis coli (example), 128 Diverticulosis (small intestine; exam-
ple), 124
Dizziness, 312, 600
Dominant extremity (glossary term), 600
Doppler echocardiography, 29 Dumping syndrome (example), 125 Duodenal ulcer (example), 121–122,
123–124
Dysesthesia (glossary term), 600 Dysphasia, 322–324
Dyspnea, 89, 259


E
Ears, 246–255
Ebstein’s anomaly of the tricuspid valve (example), 44, 45
Ectasia, aortic (examples), 70 Eczema (example), 181
Edema, lower extremities, 76–77 Effects of medication (glossary term),
600
Eisenmenger’s complex (example), 46 Ejection fraction, 28
Elbow
active radial deviation, 501 flexion and extension, 471–472 motion impairment, 469–474
  pronation and supination, 472–474 Electroencephalogram (EEG), 307
Emotional impairments, 325–327 Emphysema
chest roentgenograms, 92
example, 111
smoking and, 90
Employability determinations, 13–14 Employee injury compensation. see
Workers’ compensation

Employer’s Liability Act. see Federal Employer’s Liability Act (FELA)
Encephalopathy (example), 326 Endometriosis, pelvic (example), 168 Enteritis, 125–126
Enterocolitis (example), 129
Enterocutaneous fistulas, 132
Entrapment neuropathy, 491–495 Environmental exposure. see
Occupational exposures and injuries
Epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica (example), 187
Epididymides, 159–160 Epilepsy
convulsive, 315
partial (example), 312–315, 316–317
  uncontrolled (example), 316 Episodic neurologic impairments,
311–317
Epworth Sleepiness Scale, 317 Equilibrium, 252
Esophagitis (example), 126–127 Esophagus spasm (example), 123 Evoked potentials, 307
Exercise capacity, measuring, 101 Exercise testing, cardiovascular, 26–28 Extension. see Range of Motion Extensor tendon subluxation, 507
Eye tests. see Visual system


F
Face, 255
disfigurement, 255–256
scars (examples), 256–257
Facial nerve, 332–333
Fallopian tubes, 167–169
FAS. see Functional Acuity Score (FAS)
Federal Employer’s Liability Act (FELA), 14
FELA. see Federal Employer’s Liability Act (FELA)
Female reproductive organs, 163–170 FFS. see Functional Field Score (FFS) Fingers
Digital neuroma impairment, 449–450
DIP joint motion impairment, 462 motion impairment, 461–465
MP joint motion impairment, 464 multiple impairments, 465–466 PIP joint motion impairment,
462–463

Fistulas
rectovaginal, 164
urethra (example), 154
  vesicovaginal, 164 Flexion. see Range of Motion Foot, ankylosis, 542–543
Forced vital capacity (tables), 94–100 Forefoot, 542–543
Functional Acuity Score (FAS), 279, 600
Functional capacity evaluation, 28 Functional Field Score (FFS), 279, 600
Functional limitations, 601
Functional loss, 4
Functional Vision Score (FVS), 278, 601


G
Gait derangement, 529–530
Gait disorders, 336–337
Gastrectomy (example), 126 Gastroesophageal reflux (example), 123 Glioma (example), 326
Glomerulonephritis (example), 146,
148
Glossopharyngeal nerve, 334
Gonads, 237–239
Grafts, 176
Granulocytes, 197
Grip strength, 508–509
Growth hormone, 212
Guarding, 382
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment
background, 1–2 data used for, 4 objectivity of, 10
uses for, 9
widespread use, 12
workers’ compensation claims and, 13


H
Handicap, 9, 601. see also Disability Hands
amputations, 441–445
conversion of impairment of digits to impairment of, 438
multiple digit impairments, 465–466 normal motion evaluation, 450–454 sensory impairment, 445–450 thumb ray motion, 454–460
Upper Extremity Impairment Evaluation Record, 435–436

Hearing impairments, 246–255 audiometric measurements for,
247–249
binaural, 250
monaural, 250
Heart diseases. see Cardiac diseases Hematopoietic system, 191–209
Hemiplegia (example), 310–311 Hemolytic anemia (example), 196 Hemophilia (example), 205
Hemoptysis, 89
Hemorrhagic disorders, 203
Hepatitis (examples), 134 Hernia
abdominal wall, 136–137
glossary term, 601
  hiatal (example), 121 Hidradenitis suppurativa (example),
184
High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT), 92
Hindfoot, 542–543
Hip, ankylosis, 538–539
HIV. see Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
Hodgkin’s disease (example), 201–202
Hormone (glossary term), 601
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 198–199
(example), 200, 201
  (glossary term), 601 Huntington’s Chorea (example),
326–327
Hyperinflation, respiratory, 92
Hyperparathyroidism, 219–222
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis, 105–106
example, 109
Hypersomnolence (example), 318
Hypertension, 66–69, 314 Hypertension, pulmonary. see
       Pulmonary hypertension Hypoadrenalism, 223
Hypoglossal nerve, 334–335
Hypoglycemia, 230, 235–237
examples, 235–237
Hypogonadism, 213
Hypoparathyroidism, 221
Hypopituitarism, 213
Hypotension, 314
Hypothalamic-pituitary axis, 212–217
Hypothyroidism, secondary, 214
Hypoxia, 90
Hypoxic encephalopathy (example), 324–325
Hysterectomy, 166

I
Idiopathic cardiomyopathy. see
Cardiomyopathies
Idiopathic hypersomnolence (example), 318
Ileal resection (example), 122 Impairment, 601
authority of criteria of, 4 criteria for, 4
defined, 2
determination by physician, 2 determining, 28
organ/body system approach to, 9 permanent, 2
Impairment evaluation, 601
defined, 18
examiner requirements for, 18 examiners’ roles and responsibilities,
18
for multiple body/organ systems, 19 report preparation, 21–22
rules, 19–20
standard form for (reproducible), 22–24
three components of, 4
  in workers’ compensation, 13 Impairment percentages, 601. see also
names of specific diseases and specific organs
defined, 4
disability and, 9
work and, 4–5
Impairment ratings. see Impairment percentages
Inclinometers, 400–402
distributors, 401
Incontinence, urinary (example), 152, 155
Independent medical evaluation (IME, glossary term), 601
Inguinal hernia (examples), 137 Inherited condition (glossary term), 601 Interpretations of symptoms and signs
medication effects, 359
Intertrigo (example), 163
Intestinal malabsorption (example), 127 Intrinsic tightness, 506–507
IP (interphalangeal) joint. see Thumb Irritable bowel syndrome (example),
128
Islets of Langerhans, 230–235


J
Joint deformities, 499–505

K
Kidneys, 145–149
Kinetic perimetry, 287
Knee, 540–541
Kyphoscoliosis, 90


L
Lateral deviation, 499
Latex allergy, 177
(example), 181
Legal blindness (glossary term), 601 Leukemia
acute and chronic, 199 acute (example), 202
chronic granulocytic (example), 201 chronic lymphocytic (example), 201
Leukocytes, 197–202
Leukoderma (example), 179
Liver, 133–134
Lower extremities. see also names of specific body parts, eg, Ankle
amputations, 545
arthritis, 544–545
assessment methods, 525–528
causalgia, 553
complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS), 553
diagnosis-based estimates, 545–549
edema, 76–77
gait derangement, 529–530 interpretation of symptoms and
signs, 524–525
joint ankylosis, 538–543
limb length discrepancy, 528–529 manual muscle testing, 531–533 muscle atrophy, 530–531 peripheral nerve injuries, 550–552 peripheral vascular diseases, 73–77 range of motion, 533–538
skin loss, 550
summary of impairment evaluation procedures, 555–563
  vascular disorders, 553–554 Lumbar postlaminectomy syndrome
(example), 588
Lumbar puncture (spinal tap), 307 Lumbar spine
DRE categories, 384–388
  range-of-motion method, 405–411 Lung cancer
impairment description, 106
smoking and, 90
Lymphocytes, 197–199

M
McGill Pain Questionnaire, 578 Macrophages, 199–200 Magnetic resonance angiography
(MRA), 307
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 307
Male reproductive organs, 156–162 Malignant melanoma, 177
Malingering, 585–586, 601
Mammary glands, 239
Manual muscle testing, 509–511 lower extremities, 531–533
Maritime workers’ compensation, 14 Mastication, 262
Maximal medical improvement (MMI), 19, 601
Mediolateral laxity, 501–502
Melanoma, malignant, 177 Mental and behavior disorders,
357–372
activities of daily living, 358, 361 assessing impairment severity,
365–367
concentration, persistence, and pace, 358, 362
examples, 367–370 interpretations of symptoms and
signs, 358
malingering, 366
method of evaluating psychiatric impairment, 361–364
motivation, 358, 360
personality disorders, 365
rehabilitation effects, 360–361
report format, 370–371
severity of impairments, 363–364 social functioning, 358, 362 somatoform pain disorders, 366 stress tolerance, 358, 362 structured settings effects, 364 substance abuse, 365
treatment effects, 364
work-setting deterioration, decom- pensation, 358, 362
Mental status, evaluating, 319–322 Metabolic bone disease, 240–241 Metacarpophalangeal (MP) joint. see
       Fingers; Thumb METS (glossary term), 601 Midfoot, 542–543
Migraine (example), 586–587
Mitral regurgitation (example), 33, 34
Mitral stenosis, 34 Mitral valve
prolapse syndrome (example), 31 replacement (example), 33 replacement with prosthesis
(example), 33

Monocular acuity, 282
Monocytes, 199–200
Mononeuropathy (example), 348–349 Motion segment alteration, 383 Motivation, 358, 360, 601
Movement disorders, 337
MP (metatarsophalangeal) joint. see
Fingers
Multiple system atrophy, 316 Muscle guarding, 382
Muscle spasm, 382
Muscular impairments, 351 Musculotendinous impairments,
505–506
Mustard procedure (example), 45 Mycosis fungoides (example), 186 Myelofibrosis (example), 197


N
Nail dystrophy and anonychia (example), 182
Narcolepsy (example), 318
Natural rubber latex (NRL) allergy, 177, 181
Needle electromyography (EMG) studies, 307–308
Nephrectomy (example), 148 Nerve. see specific nerve
Nerve conduction studies, 307–308 Neurodermatitis (example), 183
Neuromuscular impairments, 351 Neuropsychologic assessment,
306–307
Neutral zero measuring method (glos- sary term), 601
Nonverifiable radicular root pain, 382 Normal, defined, 2, 601


O
Occupational exposures and injuries respiratory impairments and, 90–91
Occupational history (glossary term), 602
Oculomotor nerve, 330
Olfaction, 262
Olfactory nerve, 327
Oligospermia (example), 160
Optic nerve, 327–330
Optic neuritis (example), 329 Orchitectomy (example), 160 Orthostatic hypotension (example), 57 Osler-Weber-Rondu syndrome
(example), 205

Osteoporosis (example), 241
Ovaries, 167–169
Oxygen consumption, 101
Oxytocin, 213


P
Pain
behavioral confounders, 581–583
behaviors, 579–580
definitions, 566
determining activity restrictions, 578 determining severity of, 577–578 emotional distress and, 579
glossary term, 602
impact of, 567
impairment classifications, 575 impairments related to, 343–344 integrating impairment system for,
569–581
malingering, 585–586
medical advances in understanding, 567–569
psychogenic, 585
rating impairment, 575–581 sample protocol for rating impair-
ment, 583–584
Pain behavior (glossary term), 602 Pancreas, 230–235
Pancreatectomy (example), 124, 127
Pancreatitis (example), 122, 126
Parathyroid glands, 219–222 Paresthesias (glossary term), 602 Parkinsonian syndrome (example),
309–310
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (example), 196
Partial epilepsy (example), 312–315, 316–317
Patch test (glossary term), 602 Pelvic endometriosis (example), 168 Pelvic injury, 427–428
Pemphigus vulgaris (example), 184 Penis, 156–157
Pericardial heart disease, 52–55 Peripheral nervous system, 344–345
upper extremity impairment, 480–497
Peripheral vascular diseases (PVD), 73–77
  upper extremity, 497–498 Permanent impairment. see Impairment Permanent impairment (glossary term),
602
Persistent joint subluxation, 501 Pheochromocytomas, 228
examples, 229–230
Pinch strength, 508–509

PIP (proximal interphalangeal) joint.
see Fingers
Pituitary adenoma (example), 216–217 Pituitary disorders (hypothalamic-
pituitary axis), 212–217
Platelet disorders, 203–204
Pneumoconiosis, 102, 106
Polycystic renal disease (example), 149 Polycythemia, 196–197
Polyneuropathy (example), 349–350 Positron emission tomography (PET),
307
Postthrombophlebitis syndrome (example), 185
Prolactin, 212, 213, 214
Prostate, 161–162
Prostatectomy (example), 162 Prosthesis (glossary term), 602 Prostitis (example), 162
Proteinuria (example), 146–147
Psoriasis (example), 185
Psychogenic pain, 585
Psychogenic pain (glossary term), 602 Puberty, precocious, 237
Pulmonary function tests (glossary term), 602
Pulmonary hypertension, 79–81 Pulmonary valve stenosis (example), 43 Pyelonephritis (examples), 147, 148,
150, 154
Pyeloureteral disease (example), 150


Q
Quantitative sensory tests, 308


R
Radial neuropathy (example), 589 Radiculopathy
electrodiagnostic verification of, 382–383
glossary term, 382, 602
RADS. see Reactive airways dysfunc- tion syndrome (RADS)
Railroad workers’ compensation, 14 Range of motion, 398–404
cervical spine, 417–422
lower extremities, 533–538
lumbar spine, 405–411
measurement techniques, 593–598 nerve root/spinal cord impairment,
423–426
thoracic spine, 411–417

Ratings, impairment. see Impairment percentages
Raynaud’s phenomenon, 74, 75,
497–498, 602
Reactive airways dysfunction syndrome (RADS), 102
Rectal diseases (examples), 128–131 Recurrence (glossary term), 602 Reflexes, 382
Reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD), 343, 495–497, 587. see also Complex regional pain syn- drome (CRPS)
(example), 344
Remission, 365, 602
Renal calculi (examples), 146, 147, 148 Renal cortical necrosis (example), 149 Renal failure (example), 149
Renal transplant (example), 147 Reproductive system, 156–170
Respiration, 259–260
Respiratory system, 87–115
assessment, 91–94
assessment principles, 88 forced respiratory volume, 93 forced vital capacity, 94–100 lung capacities illustrated, 93 neurologic impairments, 341
permanent impairment examples, 107–113
sleep disorders, 105
Roentgenography, 92 ROM. see Range of Motion
Rotational deformity, 500–501


S
Salpingectomy (example), 169
Scars, 176, 179
Sciatica (glossary term), 602 Sciatic nerve, 375–376
Scrotum, 158–159
Seizure disorders, 311–317 Sensitivity (glossary term), 602
Sexual system, neurologic impairments, 342
SFTR documentation system (glossary term), 594–595, 602
Sheehan’s syndrome (example), 216 Shoulder
abduction/adduction, 476–478 flexion and extension, 475–476 instability, 503–505
internal/external rotation, 478–479
motion impairment, 474–479

Shy-Drager syndrome (example), 316 SIADH (Syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone secre- tion), 213
Sickle cell anemia (example), 195 Sickle cell trait (example), 194 Single-photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT), 307
Skin, 173–189
contact dermatitis, 176–177
disfigurement, 175–176
impairment criteria, 174–175, 178 scars and grafts, 176
Sleep apneas, 105, 318
Sleep disorders, 317–319 Smoking. see Tobacco
Social functioning (glossary term), 602 Somatoform pain disorders, 366, 602
Specificity, 603
Speech, 262–264
  impairments (examples), 266–271 Spinal accessory nerve, 334
Spinal cord impairments, 340–341 Spinal nerves, 345–346
  impairment determination, 488–489 Spinal tap (lumbar puncture), 307 Spine
abnormalities, 89
cervical region, 392–395 diagnosis-related estimate method,
379
diagnosis-related estimates method, 381–384
history and examination, 374–375 impairment evaluation process,
379–381
lumbar region, 384–388
motion segment integrity, 378–379 neurologic tests, 376–377
pelvic injury, 427–428
range-of-motion method, 379–381,
398–404
rating corticospinal tract damage, 395–398
sciatic nerve tension signs, 375–376 thoracic region, 388–391
Spirometry, 93–94, 603
Spleen, 199
Splenectomy, 199
(example), 200
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), 177 Station disorders, 336–337
Straight leg raising test (SLR), 375–376 Strength evaluation, 507–511
Stress testing (glossary term), 603 Stress tolerance, 358, 362 Surgically created stoma (glossary
term), 603
Syncope (example), 48, 59

Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH), 213
Synovial hypertrophy, 500


T
Taste, 262
Telangiectasia of the bladder (example), 151
Teleroentgenography (glossary term), 528, 603
Tendinitis, 507
Testicles, 159
Tetralogy of Fallot (example), 44, 46 Thoracic spine
diagnosis-related estimates, 388–391
range-of-motion method, 411–417
Thrombocytopenia (example), 204
Thrombophlebitis (example), 78
Thrombotic disorders, 206–207 Thumb
adduction, 458–459
CMC (carpometacarpal) joint, 458–460
IP (interphalangeal) joint, 454–456 MP (metacarpophalangeal) joint,
456–457
multiple impairments, 464–465
opposition, 459–460 range of motion, 454–456
Thumb ray motion impairment, 454–460
Thyroid, 217–219
Tinnitus, 246, 603
Tobacco, respiratory impairments and, 90
Transposition of the great vessels (example), 45
Treatment (glossary term), 603 Tricuspid regurgitation (example), 34 Trigeminal nerve, 330–332
Trochlear nerve, 330
Turner syndrome (example), 239


U
Ulnar deviation, elbow/wrist, 501 Uncontrolled epilepsy, 316 (example)
Unrinary system, neurologic impairments, 341
Upper digestive tract diseases, 120–127

Upper extremities, 433–521. see also
    specific body parts, eg, Hands amputations, 441–445
conversion impairments of, to whole person impairments, 438–440
Impairment Evaluation Record, 435–437, 515–519
nervous system impairments, 338–340
peripheral nerve disorders, 480–497 peripheral vascular diseases, 73–77 principles for adding impairment
values for, 440–441
strength evaluation, 507–511 summary of steps in impairment
evaluation, 511–512
vascular disorders, 497–498
Uremic encephalopathy (example), 310 Urethra, 153–155
Urinary diversion, 150
example, 152
Urinary incontinence (example), 152 Urinary tract, 144–145
Urodynamic tests, 383
Urticaria (example), 179
Uterus, 165–167

V
Vagus nerve, 334
Validity (glossary term), 603 Valvular heart diseases. see Cardiac
diseases
VAS. see Visual Acuity Score (VAS) Vascular diseases, peripheral, 73–77 Vascular disorders, upper extremity,
497–498
Vertigo, 252, 603
Vestibular system, 252–253
Vestibulocochlear nerve, 333–334 VFS. see Visual Field Score (VFS) Vision loss, 603
Vision (low), 603
Visual acuity, 280, 603
impairment, 281–285 near vs distance, 300 reading, 301–302
Visual Acuity Score (VAS), 283, 603
Visual field, 280, 603
binocular, 287, 294–295 binocular (steps in determining
impairment), 294–295
impairment rating, 290–291
loss (steps in determining impair- ment), 288–294
tests, 287
Visual Field Score (VFS), 288–289, 603
Visual impairment rating, 603
Visual system, impairment determina- tion, 296–300

VO (glossary term), 603 Voice, 264–265
impairments (examples), 266–271
Vulva, 163–164


W
Weakness, 382
Weber-Fechner’s law, 283
Weights, desirable, by height and body build, 119–120
Wheezing, 89
White blood cells. see Leukocytes Whole person impairment (glossary
term), 603
Workers’ compensation, 603 impairment evaluations in, 13
Wrist
flexion and extension, 467–468 motion impairment, 466–470
radial deviation, 468–469
ulnar deviation, 468–469


X
Xeroderma pigmentosum (example), 187


