================================================================================

Chapter 9:
-----------------------------------------------------------------
9.1 Principles of Assessment
9.2 Anemia
9.3 Polycythemia and Myelofibrosis
9.4 White Blood Cell Diseases or Abnormalities
9.5 Hemorrhagic and Platelet Disorders
9.6 Thrombotic Disorders
9.7 Hematologic Impairment Evaluation Summary
Introduction
This chapter provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairment of the hematopoietic system. The hematopoietic system, including the bone marrow, lymph nodes, and spleen, produces a heterogeneous population of blood-circulating cells (eg, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets) and a complex family of proteins critical for blood clotting and immune defenses. Cells from this system also produce proteins that affect daily physiologic responses (eg, granulocyte, granulocyte-macrophage stimulating factors, etc) and respond to many pathologic stimuli (eg, tumor necrosis factor and interleukins). Because the hematopoietic system supports other cells or organs of the body, identifiable defects are assigned impairment ratings only secondarily through altered function of other end organs. For example, very severe anemia can reduce oxygen delivery to the point where the individual suffers a myocardial infarction or stroke. Age and comorbid conditions further complicate the determination of impairment. Most of the products of the hematopoietic system also include remarkable compensatory biologic mechanisms.
191
Clinical alterations can be hereditary or acquired. Because of functional adaptation of the young, hereditary defects manifest in childhood are commonly modest in degree of impairment. With age, alterations become more definitive and functional impairment more evident. Abnormalities can be quantitative—production of too many cells (ie, leukemia or polycythemia) or too few cells (ie, anemia or thrombocytopenia)—or they can be qualitative, with production of a defective protein (ie, factor V Leiden or prothrombin 20210A) resulting in an increased propensity for thrombosis.
This edition of the Guides has expanded sections on human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and thrombotic disorders.
9.1 Principles of Assessment
Before using the information in this chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the Glossary. Chapters 1 and 2 discuss the Guides’ purpose, applications, and methods for performing and reporting impairment evaluations. The Glossary provides definitions of common terms used by many specialties in impairment evaluation.
9.1 a Interpretation of Symptoms and Signs Some impairment classes refer to symptoms that limit the ability to perform daily activities. When this information is subjective and open to misinterpretation, it should not serve as the sole criterion upon which decisions about impairment are made. Rather, the examiner should obtain objective data about the limitations’ extent and integrate those findings with the subjective data to estimate the degree of permanent impairment.
-- chars 3083 --
Impairment percentages reflect severity of symptoms, physical and laboratory findings, and estimated functional limitations resulting from hematologic abnormality. See Table 9-1 for the functional classifications of hematologic system disease. The activities of daily living are listed in Table 1-2 and the Glossary.
9.1 b Description of Procedures
Aids to diagnose hematologic impairment vary depending on the suspected diagnosis. Common tests include a complete blood count, bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, hemoglobin electrophoresis, direct and indirect antiglobulin test and cold agglutinin assay, flow cytometry, cytogenetics of peripheral blood and/or bone marrow, immunochemical analysis of immunoglobulins, fat pad biopsy with Congo red stain, and hemostasis studies.
9.2  Anemia
The functional effects of chronic anemia depend on the degree of the cardiovascular system’s compensatory response. Regardless of the anemia’s pathogenesis, impairment is related to the heart’s inability to deliver adequate oxygen to tissues. To compensate for the anemia, the heart increases cardiac output by acceleration of heart rate and also increases oxygen extraction from the tissues (ie, increases arteriovenous difference). Therefore, a person with a mild anemia (hemoglobin level of about 10 g/dL) and a normal cardiovascular system receives a lower impairment rating than a person with underlying dysfunction of the cardiovascular system.
Symptoms of anemia include shortness of breath on exertion, dizziness, throbbing headaches, and fatigue. The speed at which anemia develops at any hemoglobin level correlates to the complexity of symptoms. Greater degrees of anemia may be associated with lack of stamina, fatigue on exertion, fatigue at rest, and dyspnea at rest. Thus, no specific concentrations of hemoglobin determine impairment.
Anemia impairment is measured by the limitations of
The Hematopoietic System
193
cardiovascular response and may be lessened by a successful blood transfusion.
Many forms of anemia are reversible with specific therapy. Anemias resulting from decreased red cell production due to nutrient deficit (eg, iron-deficiency anemia, megaloblastic anemia secondary to folic acid,
of impairment is related to the anemia’s severity, need for transfusion, and impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living. Additional organ system impairment due to anemia can be combined using the Combined Values Chart (p. 604).
The benefits of red blood cell transfusion normally
vitamin B
deficiency, etc) are correctable with spe-
last 6 to 8 weeks. In individuals with hemolytic ane-
cific nutrient therapy.
A permanent impairment may develop from sequelae of the anemia. In megaloblastic anemia due to B deficiency, significant neurologic deficit caused by dysmyelinization (particularly of the posterolateral spinal tracks) may occur and result in permanent neurologic impairment. Folic acid deficiency during pregnancy may result in lifelong impairment of the newborn with varying degrees of neural tube defects. In some circumstances of hypoproliferative anemia from chronic renal failure, the anemia is correctable with exogenous erythropoietin even though the renal failure is irreversible. Similarly, many forms of anemia due to increased and, particularly, acquired red cell destruction (ie, hemolytic anemias) are reversible with therapy and therefore do not result in permanent impairment.
-- chars 3433 --
Persistent hemolytic anemia may cause a degree of impairment that is related to the anemia’s severity. This impairment consideration also applies to aplastic or refractory anemia caused by defective bone marrow function. Persistent refractory anemia may cause impairment regardless of the cause; the degree
mia caused by serum factors, and in some who have had many transfusions, the survival rate of transfused cells is shortened and transfusions must be repeated every 1 to 5 weeks. Impairment increases as hemolysis becomes more severe.
In congenital hemolytic anemias, particularly those related to altered hemoglobin synthesis (eg, hemoglobinopathies and thalassemias), tissue impairment beyond the hematopoietic system results in permanent impairment.1 Sickle cell diseases, especially sickle cell anemia, are commonly associated with severe, painful vaso-occlusive crisis that can result in functional impairment of varying degrees.2 These vascular occlusive lesions result in end-organ damage to the bones, heart, kidneys, and liver, compounding the degree of impairment.
9.2 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Anemia
The impairment criteria for anemia are given in Table 9-2.
†Implies hemolysis of transfused blood.
Polycythemia can produce end-organ damage to cardiovascular or cerebrovascular areas due to vascular occlusion. Vascular obstruction of the postal venous system similarly can produce end-organ injury to the liver. The impairment rating is based on the end organ involved, degree of injury, and impact on the ability to perform activities of daily living.
The Hematopoietic System
197
The criteria for diagnosis of myelofibrosis, of primary (idiopathic) or secondary (postpolycythemic) etiology, include progressive anemia with red cell changes of anisocytosis and poikilocytosis, a shift to the left of the granulocytic white cell series, and, often, nucleated red blood cells in the peripheral blood. Bone marrow indicates fibrosis with dilated sinusoids and clustering of megakaryocytes. The degree of impairment due to myelofibrosis is reflected by the degree of impairment due to the anemia. Examples are provided in the impairment section on anemia (also see Table 9-2).
Two types of leukemia, acute granulocytic leukemia and chronic granulocytic leukemia, result in impaired function of the individual and limited life expectancy, even with currently available therapy. Impairment is based on symptoms, physical findings, requirement for and frequency of therapy, and the ability to carry out activities of daily living.
9.4 b Lymphocytes
Lymphocytes provide humoral and cellular defense mechanisms. Circulating lymphocytes originate in lymphoid tissues: the bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes, and thymus. Lymphocytes circulate between the blood and the tissues. Lymphocyte cells have heterogeneous functions.
Of the two major subgroups, the “T,” or thymusderived, lymphocytes are primarily responsible for cellular immunity and are involved in delayed hypersensitivity reactions and transplant rejection. The “B,” or bursa-derived, lymphocytes are primarily responsible for humoral immunity related to the production of immunoglobulins and biologically active kinins. Subtypes of both T and B lymphoctyes have distinct functions and abnormalities that produce distinct clinical syndromes.
-- chars 3335 --
Lymphocytes can be abnormal in function and/or number, often leading to recurrent infections.
Individuals with Hodgkin’s disease or connective tissue diseases and those who have been exposed to ionizing radiation all have acquired functional defects. Some “autoimmune” diseases may be a result of functionally altered or numerically predominant subsets of lymphocytes. Impairment ratings due to abnormal numbers of lymphocytes, as with lymphopenia, are based on the severity of the condition, as indicated by recurrent infection, and a limited ability to perform activities of daily living.
The best documentation of defective lymphocyte function or numbers is to determine failure of end functions like generalized immunoglobulin deficiency or delayed hypersensitivity reaction failure. Lymphocyte abnormalities are associated with three forms of neoplastic transformation: (1) leukemias (including chronic lymphatic leukemia, chronic myelogenous leukemia, acute lymphatic leukemia, and hairy cell leukemia)4; (2) lymphomas (including Hodgkin’s disease, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and mycosis fungoides); and (3) multiple myeloma and macroglobulinemia.
Chronic lymphatic leukemia, hairy cell leukemia, and some low-grade lymphomas may be relatively indolent, require no initial therapy unless severe and irreversible, and constitute no impairment for several years. Similarly, multiple myeloma and macroglo bulinemia may be asymptomatic initially, manifested only by certain laboratory abnormalities, and consti-
tute no impairment. However, some individuals have a high level of impairment because of recurrent GI tract bleeding. Impairment may be related to developing anemia, the need for chemotherapy or radiation to enlarging lymph nodes, or, in the case of multiple myeloma, bone pain. See Chapters 6, The Digestive System; 16, The Upper Extremities; 17, The Lower Extremities; and 18, Pain, for more information about intestinal bleeding and bone pain.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection creates a progressive and ultimately fatal disease process with a complex course and widely variable degrees of functional impairment. HIV can directly destroy CD4T lymphocytes, resulting in impairment of the normal immune response against infection and neoplastic processes. The risk of developing opportunistic infection is, in general, inversely related to the absolute CD4 count.5, 6
HIV infection impairment is caused by singleor multiple-organ system involvement from primary HIV infection or the opportunistic infection or neoplastic process from immunologic dysfunction.
Essentially, every organ system can be affected, including hematologic, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, neurologic, dermatologic, and renal. Several systems are often simultaneously affected, adding to the complexity of impairment determination.
Acute retroviral syndrome may develop early in HIV infection; symptoms include fever, fatigue, pharyngitis, rash, myalgia, and arthralgia. Quantitative HIV RNA measurements also indicate the extent of
-- chars 3026 --
HIV infection. Early stages are characterized by a CD4 count greater than 0.50 ? 109/L (500 cells/mm3); individuals are often asymptomatic but may have lymphadenopathy, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and dermatologic conditions. Intermediate stages have CD4 counts of 0.20 ? 109/L to 0.50 ? 109/L (200-500 cells/mm3); antiretroviral therapy is often initiated to prolong this stage of disease. Individuals may have few or no symptoms or may develop constitutional symptoms, diarrhea, herpes simplex infection, oral or vaginal candidiasis, upper respiratory tract infection, sinusitis, or common bacterial infection. Advanced stages, often defined by CD4 counts less than 0.20 ? 109/L (200 cells/mm3), are associated
with an increased incidence of opportunistic infection
The Hematopoietic System
199
and meet the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) definition for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). At low CD4 level, there is increased incidence of complications, including Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP); Toxoplasma gondii encephalitis; tuberculosis; cryptosporidiosis salmonellosis; esophageal candidiasis; neoplasms including Kaposi’s sarcoma, lymphoma, and cervical cancer; and neurologic dysfunction, such as mononeuritis multiplex, peripheral neuropathies, cranial nerve palsies, and myelitis. At CD4 levels below
0.10 ? 109/L (100 cells mm3), the following are more common: HIV-associated dementia, wasting syndromes, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis, disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC), cryptococcal meningitis, disseminated coccidiomycosis, histoplasmosis, and invasive aspergillosis.
The degree of symptomatic involvement and the course of illness in individuals with the same CD4 cell-defined stages varies significantly. Functional impairment can also develop from toxicity responses to antiretroviral treatments, including reverse transcriptase inhibitors; viral protease enzyme inhibitors; and antibacterial, antiviral, antifungal, and antineoplastic therapy. Determine total impairment only after careful assessment of each of the potentially affected organ systems. Also consider the nature and severity of the primary or secondary infections or neoplastic processes. If several organ systems are involved in the HIV infection process, the whole person impairment percentages related to the involved systems are combined using the Combined Values Chart (see p. 604).
9.4 c Monocytes-Macrophages
The monocyte-macrophage family ingests foreign proteins, removes cellular debris, particulates material, and modulates immune responses. This functional unit of circulating monocytes and fixed macrophages, “histiocytes,” is structurally associated with endothelial cells and fibroblasts in the reticuloendothelial system. This system is recognized primarily by the phagocytic capacity of monocytes and macrophages.
Knowledge about functional defects in the monocyte-macrophage system is limited. The degree of impairment can be associated with the nature, type, and extent of infection. Lipid storage disease is another abnormality in which macrophages become repositories for lipids, and cellular and organ hyperplasia occurs in the spleen, lymph nodes, and
-- chars 3251 --
bone marrow. Marrow involvement can produce progressive and massive bone abnormalities and fractures; impairment focuses on the degree of orthopedic deficit.
Neurologic involvement also occurs in some severe forms of lipid storage disease. Enzyme replacement therapy is now available for Gaucher disease, one of the most common types of lipid storage disease.
This therapy is incredibly effective at reversing most abnormalities except for neurologic deficit. Impairment depends on the nature of the lipid, rate of deposition, and primarily affected organs.
Neoplastic transformation occurs primarily as acute monocytic leukemia, a relatively rare form of leukemia. Leukemic reticuloendotheliosis is a more chronic variant. The exact cell of origin is not clear, but the condition behaves as a form of chronic neoplastic transformation.
9.4d The Spleen and Splenectomy
A normal spleen cleanses the blood of bacteria and other foreign matter. Splenectomy removes a quarter of the total lymphoid tissue and the major mass of macrophages. As a consequence of splenectomy, some functional abnormalities may develop. These include impaired clearance of certain encapsulated bacteria, such as the pneumococcus. Occasionally, individuals develop overwhelming infections after splenectomy. This occurs in fewer than 2% of people from whom the organ has been removed and is confined mostly to the first 2 years after the operation. The incidence is greatly reduced by prophylactic administration of the polyvalent pneumococcal vaccine. Splenectomy leads to some subtle, albeit clinically silent, morphologic abnormalities of red blood cells and a slight elevation of the platelet count. Splenectomized individuals are not at an increased risk for viral or other infections from nonencapsulated bacteria.
9.4 e Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to White Blood Cell Disease
The impairment criteria for white blood cell disease are given in Table 9-3.
9.5 a Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Hemorrhagic and Platelet Disorders
The impairment criteria for hemorrhagic and platelet disorders are given in Table 9-4.
Individuals with a greater risk of thrombosis require temporary (postsurgery) to lifelong (prophylaxis for inherited thrombotic disorder and recurrent thrombosis) anticoagulation therapy. Hyperhomocysteinemia can be controlled with high doses of folates; arterial thrombosis is treated according to the system involved.
Thrombotic disorder impairment results from systematic complications following thrombosis and anticoagulation regimen. It depends on the type, site, and extent of the organ involvement, as well as the response and complications of anticoagulation.
Arterial thrombi may produce ischemic heart disease, stroke, or intermittent claudication. Venous thrombosis usually resolves with no aftereffects. If unresolved, postthrombosis syndrome may develop due to vein lumen narrowing and/or venous valve insufficiency, causing lower extremity edema, venous ulceration, venous thrombosis recurrence, and ambulation limitation.
-- chars 3064 --
9.6c Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Thrombotic Disorders Impairment is evaluated according to the affected body system. The impairment rating for a thrombotic disorder is based upon the degree of injury to the end organ, such as the lungs, heart, brain, kidney, extremities, etc, and upon how the disorder affects the individual’s capacity to perform activities of daily living. For example, a thrombotic disorder causing a stroke would be rated based on the effects of the stroke, as outlined in the nervous system. Long-term anticoagulation with warfarin or low-molecular-weight heparin increases bleeding risk and constitutes impairment in the 10% range. If there is an impairment rating of several organ systems, whole person impairment ratings for each affected system are combined (see the Combined Values Chart, p. 604).